边城	The Border Town
第一章	CHAPTER ONE
由四川过湖南去，靠东有一条官路。	An old imperial highway running east from Sichuan into Hunan province leads, after reaching the West Hunan border, to a little mountain town called Chadong.
这官路将近湘西边境到了一个地方名为「茶峒」的小山城时，有一小溪，溪边有座白色小塔，塔下住了一户单独的人家。这人家只一个老人，一个女孩子，一只黄狗。	By a narrow stream on the way to town was a little white pagoda, below which once lived a solitary family: an old man, a girl, and a yellow dog.
小溪流下去，绕山岨流，约三里便汇入茶峒的大河。	As the stream meandered on, it wrapped around a low mountain, joining a wide river at Chadong some three li downstream, about a mile.
人若过溪越小山走去，则只一里路就到了茶峒城边。	If you crossed the little stream and went up over the heights, you could get to Chadong in one li over dry land.
溪流如弓背，山路如弓弦，故远近有了小小差异。	The water path was bent like a bow, with the mountain path the bowstring, so the land distance was a little shorter.
小溪宽约二十丈，河床为大片石头作成。	The stream was about twenty zhang wide  two hundred feet  over a streambed of boulders.
静静的水即或深到一篙不能落底，却依然清澈透明，河中游鱼来去皆可以计数。	Though the quietly flowing waters were too deep for a boat pole to touch bottom, they were so clear you could count the fish swimming to and fro.
小溪既为川湘来往孔道，水常有涨落，限于财力不能搭桥，就安排了一只方头渡船。	This little stream was a major chokepoint for transit between Sichuan and Hunan, but there was never enough money to build a bridge.
这渡船一次连人带马，约可以载二十位搭客过河，人数多时则反复来去。	Instead the locals set up a square-nosed ferryboat that could carry about twenty passengers and their loads.
渡船头竖了一枝小小竹竿，挂着一个可以活动的铁环，溪岸两端水槽牵了一段废缆，有人过渡时，把铁环挂在废缆上，船上人就引手攀缘那条缆索，慢慢的牵船过对岸去。	Any more than that, and the boat went back for another trip.  Hitched to a little upright bamboo pole in the prow was a movable iron ring that went around a heavily worn cable spanning the stream all the way to the other side.  To ferry across, one slowly tugged on that cable, hand over fist, with the iron ring keeping the boat on track.
船将拢岸了，管理这渡船的，一面口中嚷着「慢点慢点」，自己霍的跃上了岸，拉着铁环，是人货牛马全上了岸，翻过小山不见了。	As the vessel neared the opposite shore, the person in charge would call out, "Steady now, take your time!" while suddenly leaping ashore holding the ring behind. The passengers, with all their goods, their horses, and their cows, would go ashore and head up over the heights, disappearing from view.
渡头为公家所有，故过渡人不必出钱。	The ferry landing was owned by the whole community, so the crossing was free to all.  Some passengers were a little uneasy about this.
有人心中不安，抓了一把钱掷到船板上时，管渡船的必为一一拾起，依然塞到那人手心里去，俨然吵嘴时的认真神气：「我有了口量，三斗米，七百钱，够了。谁要这个！」	When someone grabbed a few coins and threw them down on the boat deck, the ferryman always picked them up, one by one, and pressed them back into the hands of the giver, saying, in a stern, almost quarrelsome voice, "I'm paid for my work: three pecks of rice and seven hundred coppers. That's enough for me. Who needs this charity?"
但不成，凡事求个心安理得，出气力不受酬谁好意思，不管如何还是有人把钱的。	But that didn't always work.  One likes to feel one's done the right thing, and who feels good about letting honest labor go unrewarded?  So there were always some who insisted on paying.
管船人却情不过，也为了心安起见，便把这些钱托人到茶峒去买茶叶和草烟，将茶峒出产的上等草烟，一扎一扎挂在自己腰带边，过渡的谁需要这东西必慷慨奉赠。	This, in turn, upset the ferryman, who, to ease his own conscience, sent someone into Chadong with the money to buy tea and tobacco. Tying the best tobacco leaves Chadong had to offer into bundles and hanging them from his money belt, he'd offer them freely and generously to anyone in need.
有时从神气上估计那远路人对于身边草烟引起了相当的注意时，便把一小束草烟扎到那人包袱上去，一面说，「不吸这个吗，这好的，这妙的，味道蛮好，送人也合式！」	When he surmised from the look of a traveler from afar that he was interested in those tobacco leaves, the ferryman would stuff a few into the man's load, saying, "Elder Brother, won't you try these? Fine goods here, truly excellent; these giant leaves don't look it, but their taste is wonderful  just the thing to give as a gift!"
茶叶则在六月里放进大缸里去，用开水泡好，给过路人解渴。	Come June, he'd put his tea leaves into a big earthenware pot to steep in boiling water, for the benefit of any passerby with a thirst to quench.
管理这渡船的，就是住在塔下的那个老人。	The ferryman was the old man who lived below the pagoda.
活了七十年，从二十岁起便守在这小溪边，五十年来不知把船来去渡了若干人。	Seventy now, he'd kept to his place near this little stream since he was twenty.  In the fifty years since, there was simply no telling how many people he'd ferried across in that boat.
年纪虽那么老了。本来应当休息了，但天不许他休息，他彷佛便不能够同这一分生活离开。	He was hale and hearty despite his age; it was time for him to have his rest, but Heaven didn't agree.  He seemed tied to this work for life.
他从不思索自己的职务对于本人的意义，只是静静的很忠实的在那里活下去。	He never mulled over what his work meant to him; he just quietly and faithfully kept on with his life here.
代替了天，使他在日头升起时，感到生活的力量，当日头落下时，又不至于思量与日头同时死去的，是那个伴在他身旁的女孩子。	It was the girl keeping him company who was Heaven's agent, letting him feel the power of life as the sun rose, and stopping him from thinking of expiring along with the sunlight when it faded at night.
他唯一的朋友为一只渡船与一只黄狗，唯一的亲人便只那个女孩子。	His only friends were the ferryboat and the yellow dog; his only family, that little girl.
女孩子的母亲，老船夫的独生女，十五年前同一个茶峒军人，很秘密的背着那忠厚爸爸发生了暧昧关系。	The girl's mother, the ferryman's only child, had some fifteen years earlier come to know a soldier from Chadong through the customary exchange of amorous verses, sung by each in turn across the mountain valley.  And that had led to trysts carried on behind the honest ferryman's back.
有了小孩子后，这屯戍军士便想约了她一同向下游逃去。	When she was with child, the soldier, whose job it was to guard the farmer-soldier colonies upcountry, tried to persuade her to elope and follow him far downstream.
但从逃走的行为上看来，一个违悖了军人的责任，一个却必得离开孤独的父亲。	But taking flight would mean, for him, going against his military duty, and for her, leaving her father all alone.
经过一番考虑后，军人见她无远走勇气自己也不便毁去作军人的名誉，就心想：一同去生既无法聚首，一同去死当无人可以阻拦，首先服了毒。	They thought about it, but the garrison soldier could see she lacked the nerve to travel far away, and he, too, was loath to spoil his military reputation.  Though they could not join each other in life, nothing could stop them from coming together in death.  He took the poison first.
女的却关心腹中的一块肉，不忍心，拿不出主张。	Not steely-hearted enough to ignore the little body growing within her, the girl hesitated.
事情业已为作渡船夫的父亲知道，父亲却不加上一个有份量的字眼儿，只作为并不听到过这事情一样，仍然把日子很平静的过下去。	By now her father, the ferryman, knew what was happening, but he said nothing, as if still unaware.  He let the days pass as placidly as always.
女儿一面怀了羞惭一面却怀了怜悯，仍守在父亲身边，待到腹中小孩生下后，却到溪边吃了许多冷水死去了。	The daughter, feeling shame but also compassion, stayed at her father's side until the child was born, whereupon she went to the stream and drowned herself in the cold waters.
在一种近于奇迹中，这遗孤居然已长大成人，一转眼间便十三岁了。	As if by a miracle, the orphan lived and matured.  In the batting of an eye, she had grown to be thirteen.
为了住处两山多篁竹，翠色逼人而来，老船夫随便为这可怜的孤雏拾取了一个近身的名字，叫作「翠翠」。	Because of the compelling deep, emerald green of bamboo stands covering the mountains on either side by the stream where they lived, the old ferryman, without a second thought, named the girl after what was close at hand: Cuicui, or "Jade Green."
翠翠在风日里长养着，把皮肤变得黑黑的，触目为青山绿水，一对眸子清明如水晶。	Cuicui grew up under the sun and the wind, which turned her skin black as could be.  The azure mountains and green brooks that met her eyes turned them clear and bright as crystal.
自然既长养她且教育她，为人天真活泼，处处俨然如一只小兽物。	Nature had brought her up and educated her, making her innocent and spirited, in every way like a little wild animal.
人又那么乖，如山头黄麂一样，从不想到残忍事情，从不发愁，从不动气。	Yet she was as docile and unspoiled as a mountain fawn, wholly unacquainted with cruelty, never worried, and never angry.
平时在渡船上遇陌生人对她有所注意时，便把光光的眼睛瞅着那陌生人，作成随时皆可举步逃入深山的神气，但明白了人无机心后，就又从从容容的在水边玩耍了。	When a stranger on the ferry cast a look at her, she would shoot him a glance with those brilliant eyes, as if ready to flee into the hills at any instant; but once she saw that he meant her no harm, she would go back to playing by the waterside as if nothing had happened.
老船夫不论晴雨，必守在船头。	In rainy weather and fair, the old ferryman kept at his post in the prow of the ferryboat.
有人过渡时，便略弯着腰，两手缘引了竹缆，把船横渡过小溪。	When someone came to cross the stream, he'd stoop to grasp the bamboo cable and use both hands to pull the boat along to the other shore.
有时疲倦了，躺在临溪大石上睡着了，人在隔岸招手喊过渡，翠翠不让祖父起身，就跳下船去，很敏捷的替祖父把路人渡过溪，一切皆溜刷在行，从不误事。	When he was tired, he stretched out to sleep on the bluffs by the waterside.  If someone on the other side waved and hollered that he wanted to cross, Cuicui would jump into the boat to save her grandpa the trouble and swiftly ferry the person across, pulling on the cable smoothly and expertly without a miss.
有时又和祖父黄狗一同在船上，过渡时和祖父一同动手，船将近岸边，祖父正向客人招呼：「慢点，慢点」时，那只黄狗便口衔绳子，最先一跃而上，且俨然懂得如何方为尽职似的，把船绳紧衔着拖船拢岸。	Sometimes, when she was in the boat with her grandpa and the yellow dog, she'd tug the cable along with the ferryman till the boat got to the other side.  As it approached the far shore, while the grandfather hailed the passengers with his "Steady now, take your time," the yellow dog would be the first to jump on land, with the tie rope in his mouth. He'd pull the boat to shore with that rope clenched between his teeth, just as if it were his job.
风日清和的天气，无人过渡，镇日长闲，祖父同翠翠便坐在门前大岩石上晒太阳。	When the weather was clear and fine and there was nothing to do because no one wanted to cross, Grandpa and Cuicui would sun themselves atop the stone precipice in front of their home.
或把一段木头从高处向水中抛去，嗾使身边黄狗自岩石高处跃下，把木头衔回来。	Sometimes they'd throw a stick into the water from above and whistle to the yellow dog to jump down from the heights to fetch it.
或翠翠与黄狗皆张着耳朵，听祖父说些城中多年以前的战争故事。	Or Cuicui and the dog would prick up their ears while Grandpa told them stories of war in the city many, many years ago.
或祖父同翠翠两人，各把小竹作成的竖笛，逗在嘴边吹着迎亲送女的曲子。	Other times, they'd each press a little upright bamboo flute to their lips and play the melodies of bridal processions, in which the groom went to the bride's house and brought her home.
过渡人来了，老船夫放下了竹管，独自跟到船边去，横溪渡人，在岩上的一个，见船开动时，于是锐声喊着：	When someone came to cross, the old ferryman would lay down his flute and ferry the person across on the boat by himself, while the girl, still on the cliff, would call out in a high-pitched voice, just as the boat took off,
「爷爷，爷爷，你听我吹，你唱！」	"Grandpa, Grandpa, listen to me play. You sing!"
爷爷到溪中央便很快乐的唱起来，哑哑的声音同竹管声振荡在寂静空气里，溪中彷佛也热闹了一些。	At midstream, Grandpa would suddenly break out in joyful song; his hoarse voice and the reedy sound of the flute pulsated in the still air, making the whole stream seem to stir.
（实则歌声的来复，反而使一切更寂静一些了。）	Yet the reverberating strains of song brought out the stillness all around.
有时过渡的是从川东过茶峒的小牛，是羊群，是新娘子的花轿，翠翠必争看作渡船夫，站在船头，懒懒的攀引缆索，让船缓缓的过去。	When the passengers heading for Chadong from East Sichuan included some calves, a flock of sheep, or a bridal cortege with its ornate palanquin, Cuicui would rush to do the ferrying.
牛羊花轿上岸后，翠翠必跟着走，站到小山头，目送这些东西走去很远了，方回转船上，把船牵靠近家的岸边。	Standing in the boat's prow, she'd move the craft along the cable languidly and the crossing would be quite slow.  After the calves, sheep, or palanquin were ashore, Cuicui would follow, escorting the pack up the hill, and stand there on the heights, fixing her eyes on them for a long ways before she returned to the ferryboat to pull it back to the shore and home.
且独自低低的学小羊叫着，学母牛叫着，或采一把野花缚在头上，独自装扮新娘子。	All alone, she'd softly bleat like the lambs, low like a cow, or pick wildflowers to bind up her hair like a bride  all alone.
茶峒山城只隔渡头一里路，买油买盐时，逢年过节祖父得喝一杯酒时，祖父不上城，黄狗就伴同翠翠入城里去备办东西。到了卖杂货的铺子里，有大把的粉条，大缸的白糖，有炮仗，有红蜡烛，莫不给翠翠很深的印象，回到祖父身边，总把这些东西说个半天。	The mountain town of Chadong was only a li from the ferry dock.  When in town to buy oil or salt, or to celebrate the New Year, the grandfather would stop for a drink.
那里河边还有许多上行船，百十船夫忙着起卸百货。这种船只比起渡船来全大得多，有趣味得多，翠翠也不容易忘记。	When he stayed home, the yellow dog would accompany Cuicui as she went to town for supplies.  What she would see in the general store  big piles of thin noodles made from bean starch, giant vats of sugar, firecrackers, and red candles  made a deep impression on her.  When she got back to her grandfather, she'd go on about them endlessly.  The many boats on the river in town were much bigger than the ferryboat and far more intriguing, quite unforgettable to Cuicui.
第二章	CHAPTER TWO
茶峒地方凭水依山筑城，近山的一面，城墙如一条长蛇，缘山爬去。	Chadong was built between the river and the mountains.  On the land side, the city wall crept along the mountain contours like a snake.
临水一面则在城外河边留出余地设码头，湾泊小小篷船。	On the water side, tiny boats with awnings berthed along wharves constructed on the land between the wall and the river.
船下行时运桐油青盐，染色的棓子。	Boats heading downstream carried loads of tung oil, rock salt, and nutgalls  the wasp-made swellings on oak trees used to make dyes.
上行则运棉花棉纱以及布匹杂货同海味。	Those going upstream transported cotton yarn and cloth, foodstuffs, household supplies, and choice seafood.
贯串各个码头有一条河街，人家房子多一半着陆，一半在水，因为余地有限，那些房子莫不设有吊脚楼。	Threading through each of the wharves was River Street.  Land was scarce, so most people's houses were "dangling-foot houses," half on land, half on stilts built over the water. When water crept up over the street during a great springtime flood, the households of River Street would extend long ladders from the eaves of their houses across to the city wall.
河中涨了春水，到水逐渐进街后，河街上人家，便各用长长的梯子，一端搭在屋檐口，一端搭在城墙上，人人皆骂着嚷着，带了包袱、铺盖、米缸，从梯子上进城里去，水退时方又从城门口出城。	Cursing and shouting, they'd enter the city over the ladders, carrying cloth-wrapped bundles, bedrolls, and crocks of rice, then wait for the water to recede before coming back out of the city through the gate in the wall.
某一年水若来得特别猛一些，沿河吊脚楼必有一处两处为大水冲去，大家皆在城上头呆望。	If one year the waters raged especially fierce, the flood might break through the row of stilt houses in one or two places.  The onlookers atop the city wall could only gape.
受损失的也同样呆望着，对于所受的损失彷佛无话可说，与在自然安排下，眼见其他无可挽救的不幸来时相似。	Those who suffered the harm stared right back, speechless over their loss, as if it were just one more unhappy and unavoidable act of nature.
涨水时在城上还可望着骤然展宽的河面，流水浩浩荡荡，随同山水从上流浮沉而来的有房子、牛、羊、大树。	When the river flooded, one could watch its sudden swelling from the city wall.  Within that vast surge of mountain waters from upstream, houses, oxen, sheep, and giant trees bobbed up and down.
于是在水势较缓处，税关趸船前面，便常常有人驾了小舢板，一见河心浮沉而来的是一匹牲畜，一段小木，或一只空船，船上有一个妇人或一个小孩哭喊的声音，便急急的把船桨去，在下游一些迎着了那个目的物，把它用长绳系定，再向岸边桨去。	In the places where the torrent slowed, as in front of the pontoons by the customs house, people often went out in little sampans.  When they spied a head of livestock, a piece of lumber, or a cargoless boat rising and falling in the waves midstream, perhaps with a crying and screaming woman or child on board, they urgently paddled out, and after meeting the object of rescue downstream, lashed it to the sampan with a long rope, then rowed back to shore.
这些诚实勇敢的人，也爱利，也仗义，同一般当地人相似。	These daring souls typified the local people: they had an eye for their own gain, but also for helping other folks.
不拘救人救物，却同样在一种愉快冒险行为中，做得十分敏捷勇敢，使人见及不能不为之喝采。	They were equally joyful salvaging people and property, and they did it with such skill and bravery that onlookers felt compelled to shout hurrahs.
那条河水便是历史上知名的酉水，新名字叫作白河。	The river was the famous You Shui of history, whose new name is the Bai Shui or White River.
白河下游到辰州与沅水汇流后，便略显浑浊，有出山泉水的意思。	After the White River got to Chenzhou and merged with the River Yuan, it became somewhat turbid, proving the adage that spring water becomes muddy when it leaves the mountains.
若溯流而上，则三丈五丈的深潭皆清澈见底。	Trace the river back upstream, and it was so clear you could see right down to the bottom, through pools thirty or fifty feet deep.
深潭为白日所映照，河底小小白石子，有花纹的玛瑙石子，全看得明明白白。水中游鱼来去，全如浮在空气里。	When the sun shone on the deep parts, the white pebbles and striated carnelian stones at the bottom were visible clear as could be, along with fish darting to and fro as if floating in air.
两岸多高山，山中多可以造纸的细竹，长年作深翠颜色，逼人眼目。	High mountains came down to the river on both sides  mountains covered with slender bamboos good for making paper, in all seasons such a deep emerald color as to transfix the eyes.
近水人家多在桃杏花里，春天时只需注意，凡有桃花处必有人家，凡有人家处必可沽酒。	Households near the water appeared among peach and apricot blossoms.  Come spring, one had only to look: wherever there were peach blossoms there was sure to be a home, and wherever there were people, you could stop for a drink.
夏天则晒晾在日光下耀目的紫花布衣裤，可以作为人家所在的旗帜。	In the summer, purple cotton-print tunics and trousers that dazzled the eye as they dried in the sunlight became ensigns of human habitation.
秋冬来时，房屋在悬崖上的，滨水的，无不朗然入目。	When autumn and winter arrived, dwellings on the cliffs and by the water came clearly into view  not one could escape notice.
黄泥的墙，乌黑的瓦，位置则永远那么妥贴，且与四围环境极其调和，使人迎面得到的印象，实在非常愉快。	Walls of yellow earth and pitch-black tiles, neatly placed there for all time and in harmony with the surroundings on every side, brought the viewer a sense of extraordinary joy.
一个对于诗歌图画稍有兴味的旅客，在这小河中，蜷伏于一只小船上，作三十天的旅行，必不至于感到厌烦，正因为处处有奇迹，自然的大胆处与精巧处，无一处不使人神往倾心。	A traveler with the slightest interest in poetry or painting could sail this narrow river curled up in a little boat for a whole month without ever getting tired of it.  Miracles could be discovered everywhere.  The boldness, the exquisiteness of nature, at every place and every time, led one inescapably into rapture.
白河的源流，从四川边境而来，从白河上行的小船，春水发时可以直达川属的秀山。	The source of the White River was up past the Sichuan frontier.  Small boats going upstream could make it all the way on the high waters of spring to Xiushan in Sichuan.
但属于湖南境界的，则茶峒为最后一个水码头。	Chadong was the last river port on the Hunan side of the border.
这条河水的河面，在茶峒时虽宽约半里，当秋冬之际水落时，河床流水处还不到二十丈，其余只是一滩青石。	The big river broadened to half a li at Chadong, but when autumn turned to winter and the water level fell, it revealed a riverbed only two hundred feet wide.  Beyond that were only shoals of black boulders.
小船到此后，既无从上行，故凡川东的进出口货物，皆由这地方落水起岸。	Boats arriving at this point could go no farther upstream, so all goods going in or out of East Sichuan had to be unloaded here.
出口货物俱由脚夫用杉木扁担压在肩膊上挑抬而来，入口货物也莫不从这地方成束成担的用人力搬去。	Products came out of the province on mulberry wood carrying poles borne on the shoulders of porters.  Goods headed the other way had to be tied into bundles for transport by muscle power.
这地方城中只驻扎一营由昔年绿营屯丁改编而成的戍兵，及五百家左右的住户。	Chadong and its environs were defended by a lone battalion of garrison troops reorganized from the Green Standard Army's farmer-soldiers of yesteryear.  They were joined by almost five hundred resident households in town.
（这些住户中，除了一部分拥有了些山田同油坊，或放账屯油、屯米、屯棉纱的小资本家外，其余多数皆为当年屯戍来此有军籍的人家。）	(Apart from those who owned fields up in the mountains or tung oil presses, and small-time capitalists who gave out loans for tung oil, rice, or cotton yarn, nearly all the others in town were on the military payroll, descended from households brought in to garrison the area.)
地方还有个厘金局，办事机关在城外河街下面小庙里，经常挂着一面长长的幡信。	There was also a likin transit-tax bureau, housed in a little temple below River Street outside the city wall.
局长则住在城中。	The bureau chief had lived in town for a long time.
一营兵士驻扎老参将衙门，除了号兵每天上城吹号玩，使人知道这里还驻有军队以外，其余兵士皆彷佛并不存在。	The battalion of soldiers was quartered in the yamen of the former Green Standard lieutenant-colonel.  Were it not for the bugler who blew his daily calls from atop the city wall, reminding all that a garrison was here, one would hardly know that these people were soldiers.
冬天的白日里，到城里去，便只见各处人家门前皆晾晒有衣服同青菜。	On winter days, clothes and green vegetables could be seen drying in the sun in front of every doorway.
红薯多带藤悬挂在屋檐下。	Sweet potatoes hung from the eaves by their vines.
用棕衣作成的口袋，装满了栗子榛子和其他硬壳果，也多悬挂在屋檐下。	Bags made from palm-bark rain capes, stuffed with chestnuts and hazelnuts, also hung under the eaves.
屋角隅各处有大小鸡叫着玩着。	Chickens big and little disported themselves by every house, cackling.
间或有什么男子，占据在自己屋前门限上锯木，或用斧头劈树，把劈好的柴堆到敞坪里去一座一座如宝塔。	Here and there would be a man sitting on the high doorsill of his house or splitting logs with an ax, stacking his firewood in the courtyard in neat piles like pagodas.
又或可以见到几个中年妇人，穿了浆洗得极硬的蓝布衣裳，胸前挂有白布扣花围裙，躬着腰在日光下一面说话一面作事。	Middle-aged women wore blue cotton outfits starched stiff, with embroidered white cotton aprons hanging down across their bosoms.  They chatted as they worked, stooping in the sunlight.
一切总永远那么静寂，所有人民每个日子皆在这种单纯寂寞里过去。	It all reflected eternal peace.  Everybody passed each day in a pure quietude that is hard to imagine.
一分安静增加了人对于「人事」的思索力，增加了梦。	This measure of tranquility allowed everyone to consider their personal affairs and also their dreams.
在这小城中生存的，各人也一定皆各在分定一份日子里，怀了对于人事爱憎必然的期待。	Each and every denizen of this small town, within the days allotted by nature, nursed his or her own hopes of love and expectations of hate.
但这些人想些什么？	But what exactly were they thinking about?
谁知道。	That was unfathomable.
住在城中较高处，门前一站便可以眺望对河以及河中的景致，船来时，远远的就从对河滩上看着无数纤夫。	Those who lived in the higher elevations within the city walls saw from their front doors scenes of the river and the opposite shore.  When a boat approached, they could see innumerable trackers on the opposite bank pulling it upstream.
那些纤夫也有从下游地方，带了细点心洋糖之类，拢岸时却拿进城中来换钱的。	Those trackers brought cakes and imported candies from downriver, which they would exchange for cash in the city after coming ashore.
船来时，小孩子的想象，当在那些拉船人一方面。	Whenever a boat came to town, the local children's imaginations flew to the men who did the pulling.
大人呢，孵一巢小鸡，养两只猪，托下行船夫打副金耳环，带两丈官青布或一坛好酱油、一个双料的美孚灯罩回来，便占去了大部分作主妇的心了。	And the adults?  If they'd hatched a nest of chicks or raised a pig or two, they'd entrust them to the towmen on the downstream voyage, to exchange for gold earrings, a few yards of superior black cloth, an earthenware jug of gift-quality soy sauce, or an especially sturdy chimney for their American Standard Oil kerosene lamp.  Such thoughts preoccupied most of the housewives.
这小城里虽那么安静和平但地方既为川东商业交易接头处，因此城外小小河街，情形却不同了一点。	This small town was peaceful and quiet within its walls, but its location made it the nexus for commerce with East Sichuan, so the little River Street outside the city wall was quite a different story.
也有商人落脚的客店，坐镇不动的理发馆。	There were inns where merchants put up and barbers who stayed in place, not just the itinerant ones who set up their chair in the street.
此外饭店、杂货铺、油行、盐栈、花衣庄，莫不各有一种地位，装点了这条河街。	There were restaurants, a general store, firms dealing in tung oil and salt, and a shop selling cloth of all designs and colors  every kind of merchandise had found its place along this River Street.
还有卖船上用的檀木活车、竹缆与罐锅铺子，介绍水手职业吃码头饭的人家。	Still another outfit sold hardwood pulleys, bamboo cables, woks and pots, all for use onboard ships.  And wharf rats made their living connecting the boatmen with their employers.
小饭店门前长案上，常有煎得焦黄的鲤鱼豆腐，身上装饰了红辣椒丝，卧在浅口钵头里，钵旁大竹筒中插着大把红筷子，不拘谁个愿意花点钱，这人就可以傍了门前长案坐下来，抽出一双筷子到手上，那边一个眉毛扯得极细脸上擦了白粉的妇人就走过来问：「大哥，副爷，要甜酒？要烧酒？」	Long tables in front of the little restaurants offered carp fried a crispy brown, lying in a big shallow earthenware bowl with bean curd, the fish adorned with slivers of red peppers.  Next to the bowl was a big bamboo cylinder with giant red chopsticks sticking up out of it. Anyone willing to plunk down the money could edge up to that table outside the front door, take a seat, and pull out a pair of those chopsticks. A woman with a white powdered face and finely plucked eyebrows would come over and ask, "Elder Brother, Honorable Soldier, what'll it be? Sweet wine? Clear liquor?"
男子火焰高一点的，谐趣的，对内掌柜有点意思的，必装成生气似的说：「吃甜酒？又不是小孩，还问人吃甜酒」	A male customer who was witty and wanted to get a rise out of her, or who fancied the proprietress a little, would feign anger and retort, "Sweet wine, for the likes of me? Do I look like a child? Sweet wine, you say!"
那么，酽冽的烧酒，从大瓮里用竹筒舀出，倒进土碗里，即刻就来到身边案桌上了。	Potent white spirits were then dipped out of the wine vat with a wooden ladle into an earthenware bowl set immediately upon the table. This bowl of spirits was of course strong and pungent, enough to knock out many a stout fellow, so one couldn't drink another.
杂货铺卖美孚油及点美孚油的洋灯，与香烛纸张。	The general store sold American kerosene, the Standard Oil lamps that burned it, incense, candles, and paper goods.
油行屯桐油。	The oil firm was a depot for tung oil.
盐栈堆火井出的青盐。	The salt firm stored piles of rock salt of the sort produced since ancient times in Huojing town, Sichuan.
花衣庄则有白棉纱、大布、棉花以及包头的黑绉绸出卖。	The dry goods shop sold white cotton yarn, cloth, cotton, and the black silk crepe wound around the head as a turban.
卖船上用物的，百物罗列，无所不备，且间或有重至百斤以外的铁锚搁在门外路旁，等候主顾问价的。	The ship chandler had just about everything in its trade, sometimes even an anchor weighing a hundred catties just resting outside the door and waiting for a customer to ask its price.
专以介绍水手为事业，吃水码头饭的，则在河街的家中，终日大门敞开着，常有穿青羽缎马褂的船主与毛手毛脚的水手进出，地方像茶馆却不卖茶，不是烟馆又可以抽烟。	Boat owners clad in their dark blue sateen mandarin jackets and fidgeting boatmen went in and out of the establishment of the wharf rats who got the boatmen their work; its door, on River Street, was open all day long.  It was like a teahouse that sold no tea, though you could smoke a pipe of opium there.
来到这里的，虽说所谈的是船上生意经，然而船只的上下，划船拉纤人大都有一定规矩，不必作数目上的讨论。	The men all said they went there to keep up on their trade, but everybody in the crew from top to bottom, from the oarsmen on board to the trackers onshore, observed a rule: no talking about numbers.
他们来到这里大多数倒是在「联欢」。以「龙头管事」作中心，谈论点本地时事，两省商务上情形，以及下游的「新事」。邀会的，集款时大多数皆在此地，扒骰子看点数多少轮作会首时，也常常在此举行。	Most went there to "socialize." With the "Dragon Head" lodge master at the center of things, they talked about local affairs, business conditions in the two provinces, and "news," most of which came from downriver. Meetings and fund-raising generally took place here, and it was here, too, that money-savers' circles often threw the dice to see who took home the pot this time.
常常成为他们生意经的，有两件事：买卖船只，买卖媳妇。	The trades that really held their attention were two in number: the buying and selling of boats, and of women.
大都市随了商务发达而产生的某种寄食者，因为商人的需要，水手的需要，这小小边城的河街，也居然有那么一群人，聚集在一些有吊脚楼的人家。	Certain kinds of big-city hangers-on follow commercial prosperity, to meet the needs of merchants and also the boatmen.  Even this tiny border town had those types along its River Street; they congregated in establishments housed in the dangling-foot structures.
这种妇人不是从附近乡下弄来，便是随同川军来湘流落后的妇人，穿了假洋绸的衣服，印花标布的裤子，把眉毛扯得成一条细线，大大的发髻上敷了香味极浓俗的油类。	These little dames were either brought in from the surrounding countryside or they were camp followers of the Sichuan Army when it had come foraging in Hunan.  They wore jackets of faux foreign satin over cotton print trousers; they plucked their eyebrows into thin lines and drew up their hair into big topknots that gave off strong scents of cheaply perfumed oil.
白日里无事，就坐在门口做鞋子，在鞋尖上用红绿丝线挑绣双凤，或为情人水手挑绣花抱兜，一面看过往行人，消磨长日。	Unoccupied during the day, they sat outside their doorways on little square stools, making shoes to while away the time, embroidering mating phoenixes on the toes in red and green silk thread and keeping an eye out for passersby.
或靠在临河窗口上看水手铺货，听水手爬桅子唱歌。	Or they'd sit by a window along the river to watch the sailors lifting cargo and listen to them sing as they climbed up the masts.
到了晚间，则轮流的接待商人同水手，切切实实尽一个妓女应尽的义务。	Come evening, though, they'd take their turns serving the merchants and the boatmen, earnestly doing all that it was a prostitute's duty to do.
由于边地的风俗淳朴，便是作妓女，也永远那么浑厚，遇不相熟的人，做生意时得先交钱，再关门撒野，人既相熟后，钱便在可有可无之间了。	Folkways in a border district are so straightforward and unsophisticated that even the prostitutes retained their everlasting honesty and simplicity.  With a new customer, they got the money in advance; with business settled, they closed the door and the wild oats were sown.  If they knew the customer, payment was up to him.
妓女多靠四川商人维持生活，但恩情所结，则多在水手方面。	The prostitutes depended on the Sichuan merchants for their living, but their love went to the boatmen.
感情好的，互相咬着嘴唇咬着颈脖发了誓，约好了「分手后各人皆不许胡闹」，四十天或五十天，在船上浮着的那一个，同留在岸上的这一个，便皆待着打发这一堆日子，尽把自己的心紧紧缚定远远的一个人。	When the couple were sweet on each other, they'd each swear an oath when parting, biting each other on the lips and the nape of the neck, promising to stay true during their separation.  The one afloat on the boat, and likewise the one staying ashore, got through the next forty, the next fifty days with their heartstrings firmly bound to the other so far away.
尤其是妇人感情真挚，痴到无可形容，男子过了约定时间不回来，做梦时，就总常常梦船拢了岸，一个人摇摇荡荡的从船跳板到了岸上，直向身边跑来。	Particularly the women, who were given to true infatuations of indescribable simplemindedness, would see their man in their dreams if he failed to return within the agreed-upon time.  Often they'd envision the boat pull into shore and their man teeter on his sea legs down the gangplank, then come running directly to her side.
或日中有了疑心，则梦里必见男子在桅上向另一方面唱歌，却不理会自己。	If she'd begun to doubt him, she'd see the man up in the rigging, directing his songs toward another quarter and ignoring her.
性格弱一点儿的，接着就在梦里投河吞鸦片烟，性格强一点儿的便手执菜刀，直向那水手奔去。	The weaker spirits would proceed to dream of drowning themselves in the river or taking an overdose of opium, whereas those made of sterner stuff would run at their man with a cleaver.
他们生活虽那么同一般社会疏远，但是眼泪与欢乐，在一种爱憎得失间，揉进了这些人生活里时，也便同另外一片土地另外一些年轻生命相似，全个身心为那点爱憎所浸透，见寒作热，忘了一切。	Though far outside the bounds of ordinary society, when tears and laughter worked their way into these women's lives through loves won and loves lost, they were just like women of any other time or place, ruled body and soul by love and hate, with all their chills and fevers, oblivious to all else.
若有多少不同处，不过是这些人更真切一点，也更近于胡涂一点罢了。	The only thing really setting them apart was that they were a little more given to resolve, and therefore also foolishness  just that, no more.
短期的包定，长期的嫁娶，一时间的关门，这些关于一个女人身体上的交易，由于民情的淳朴，身当其事的不觉得如何下流可耻，旁观者也就从不用读书人的观念，加以指摘与轻视。	Short-term commitments, long-term engagements, one-night stands  these transactions with women's bodies, given the simplicity of local mores, did not feel degrading or shameful to those who did business with their bodies, nor did those on the outside use the concepts of the educated to censure them or look down on them.
这些人既重义轻利，又能守信自约，即便是娼妓，也常常较之讲道德知羞耻的城市中人还更可信任。	These women put principles before profit and they kept their promises; even if they were prostitutes, they tended to be more trustworthy than city people who knew all about "shame."
掌水码头的名叫顺顺，一个前清时便在营伍中混过日子来的人物，革命时在著名的陆军四十九标做个什长。同样做什长的，有因革命成了伟人名人的，有杀头碎尸的，他却带少年喜事得来的脚疯痛，回到了家乡，把所积蓄的一点钱，买了一条六桨白木船，租给一个穷船主，代人装货在茶峒与辰州之间来往。	The man in charge of the docks was one Shunshun, a character who'd spent his time in the ranks during the Qing dynasty and then led a squad as a sergeant in the famous Forty-ninth army regiment at the time of the revolution.  Others of his rank had either become famous for their revolutionary exploits or lost their heads, but he went home, though with bad feet  the result of gout from youthful carousing.  He bought a simple six-man wooden boat with his modest savings and rented it out to a boat captain down on his luck to transport goods between Chadong and Chenzhou on commission.
气运好，半年之内船不坏事，于是他从所赚的钱上，又讨了一个略有产业的白脸黑发小寡妇。	Luck was with him; the boat sailed safely, and in six months he'd saved money enough to marry a pretty, black-haired young widow.
数年后，在这条河上，他就有了大小四只船，一个铺子，两个儿子了。	That was his start.  Several years later, he had acquired eight boats that plied the river, a wife, and two sons.
但这个大方洒脱的人，事业虽十分顺手，却因欢喜交朋结友，慷慨而又能济人之急，便不能同贩油商人一样大大发作起来。	This untrammeled and free-spending fellow, able though he was in business, liked to store up friends and give out money.  Shunshun was always there for those in need, so he never became greatly rich like the tung oil merchants.
自己既在粮子里混过日子，明白出门人的甘苦，理解失意人的心情，故凡因船只失事破产的船家，过路的退伍兵士，游学文墨人，凡到了这个地方闻名求助的，莫不尽力帮助。	He knew what it was like to live on army rations and endure the hardships of travel, and what it felt like to have one's hopes dashed.  Whenever a boat owner bankrupted by a shipwreck, a demobilized soldier on his way home, or a scholar or painter wanting to study abroad came to town for help because he'd heard of Shunshun's generosity, he did his utmost for them, one and all.
一面从水上赚来钱，一面就这样洒脱散去。	He earned his fortune from the water, and so he sprinkled that fortune all around.
这人虽然脚上有点小毛病，还能泅水；走路难得其平，为人却那么公正无私。	He could swim, even with his bad feet.  His walk was uneven, but his character and judgments were straightforward, right down the middle.
水面上各事原本极其简单，一切皆为一个习惯所支配，谁个船碰了头，谁个船妨害了别一个人别一只船的利益，皆照例有习惯方法来解决。	Things were fairly simple out on the river; everything was decided by customary practice.  Which boat was at fault in a collision, which boat had harmed another's property  usually there was an established way to decide it.
惟运用这种习惯规矩排调一切的，必需一个高年硕德的中心人物。	But to apply all these customary laws they needed an elder of tested virtue.
某年秋天，那原来执事人死去了，顺顺作了这样一个代替者。	On an autumn day some years before, the old boss of the riverfront had passed away.  Shunshun took his place.
那时他还只五十岁，为人既明事明理，正直和平又不爱财，故无人对他年龄怀疑。	He was only fifty at the time, but he was so astute, upright, and even-tempered, so free of greed and venality, that no objections were heard on account of his youth.
到如今，他的儿子大的已十八岁，小的已十六岁。	His older son was now already seventeen years old; the younger, fifteen.
两个年青人皆结实如小公牛，能驾船，能泅水，能走长路。	These young men were as strong and muscular as little bulls.  They could pilot boats and they could swim and hike long distances.
凡从小乡城里出身的年青人所能够作的事，他们无一不作，作去无一不精。	Anything a lad who had grown up in a country town could do, they could do, and expertly.
年纪较长的，如他们爸爸一样，豪放豁达，不拘常套小节。	The older was more like his father in temper  bold, unconstrained, and confident, not tied down by pettiness or convention.
年幼的则气质近于那个白脸黑发的母亲，不爱说话，眼眉却秀拔出群，一望即知其为人聪明而又富于感情。	The younger one's personality followed that of his pretty and delicate mother.  He was not so given to talk, and his eyebrows were exquisite and forceful  one look at him and you knew he was intelligent and full of passion.
两兄弟既年已长大，必需在各种生活上来训练他们，作父亲的就轮流派遣两个小孩子各处旅行。	Now that the brothers had grown up, it was time to test their characters in every different line of work.  The father had sent each boy in turn on journeys to distant parts.
向下行船时，多随了自己的船只充伙计，甘苦与人相共。	When taking a boat downstream, they suffered the same hardships as the rest of the crew.
荡桨时选最重的一把，背纤时拉头纤二纤，吃的是干鱼，辣子，臭酸菜，睡的是硬帮帮的舱板。	When it was time to man the oars, they chose the heaviest one, and when it was time for towing, they took the lead place among the trackers.  They ate the same dried fish, hot peppers, and putrid pickled cabbage as the others, and they slept on the same stiff, hard deck planks.
向上行从旱路走去，则跟了川东客货，过秀山、龙潭，酉阳作生意，不论寒暑雨雪，必穿了草鞋按站赶路。	On the land route upriver, taking the East Sichuan trade route, they did business in Xiushan, Longtan, and Youyang, always on schedule, even while wearing straw sandals in heat and cold, rain and snow.
且佩了短刀，遇不得已必需动手，便霍的把刀抽出，站到空阔处去，等候对面的一个，接着就同这个人用肉搏来解决。帮里的风气，既为「对付仇敌必需用刀，联结朋友也必需用刀」，故需要刀时，他们也就从不让它失去那点机会。	The young men were armed with knives.  They could unsheathe them in a flash, but did so only when forced.  They'd move to a clearing and wait for the opponent to make his move, then let their muscles decide the outcome.
学贸易，学应酬，学习到一个新地方去生活，且学习用刀保护身体同名誉，教育的目的，似乎在使两个孩子学得做人的勇气与义气。	Gang ritual decreed that "it takes a knife both to fend off adversaries and make blood brothers," so when a knife was needed, the two boys were not shy about putting it to its intended use. All their education  in the ways of trade, social manners, living in a strange environment, using a knife to defend their persons and their reputations  seemed aimed at teaching these two boys the courage and sense of duty to be a man.
一分教育的结果，弄得两个人皆结实如老虎，却又和气亲人，不骄惰，不浮华，不倚势凌人，故父子三人在茶峒边境上为人所提及时，人人对这个名姓无不加以一种尊敬。	And this very education made both of them as strong and tough as tigers, yet also friendly and approachable, never lazy and arrogant, ostentatious, or bullying.  When anyone at the Chadong frontier brought up the character of Shunshun and his boys, they always spoke their names with respect.
作父亲的当两个儿子很小时，就明白大儿子一切与自己相似，却稍稍见得溺爱那第二个儿子。	Since his boys' infancy, their father had seen that the elder would resemble him in all things, yet he seemed slightly partial to the younger son.
由于这点不自觉的私心，他把长子取名天保，次子取名傩送。	This unconscious preference led him to name the elder son Tianbao (Heaven-protected), and his younger brother Nuosong (Sent by the Nuo Gods).
意思是天保佑的在人事上或不免有龃龉处，至于傩神所送来的，照当地习气，人便不能稍加轻视了。	He who was protected by Heaven might not be so favored in the worldly affairs of humans, but he who was sent by the Nuo gods, according to local understanding, must not be underestimated.
傩送美丽得很，茶峒船家人拙于赞扬这种美丽，只知道为他取出一个诨名为「岳云」。	Nuosong was exquisitely handsome.  The boat people of Chadong were hard put to find words for his good looks.  The best they could come up with was the nickname Yue Yun.
虽无什么人亲眼看到过岳云，一般的印象，却从戏台上小生岳云，得来一个相近的神气。	None of them had ever seen Yue Yun, that most handsome warrior of the Song dynasty a thousand years earlier, but they thought they saw a resemblance to the dashing Yue Yun figure who appeared onstage in local opera.
第三章	CHAPTER THREE
两省接壤处，十余年来主持地方军事的，注重在安辑保守，处置还得法，并无变故发生。	For ten years and more, the local military commander at this provincial border had emphasized maintaining the peace and keeping things as they were.  He handled things quite deftly, so there had been no unrest.
水陆商务既不至于受战争停顿，也不至于为土匪影响，一切莫不极有秩序，人民也莫不安分乐生。	Commerce on land and water never had to stop on account of warfare or rural banditry; good order was the rule, and people were satisfied.
这些人，除了家中死了牛，翻了船，或发生别的死亡大变，为一种不幸所绊倒觉得十分伤心外，中国其他地方正在如何不幸挣扎中的情形，似乎就永远不会为这边城人民所感到。	They felt grief at such misfortunes as the death of a cow, the capsizing of a boat, or any other fatal catastrophe, but the disasters suffered by other places in China due to the awful struggles going on there seemed never to be felt by these frontier folk.
边城所在一年中最热闹的日子，是端午，中秋和过年。	The most stirring days of the year in this border town were the Dragon Boat Festival, the Mid-autumn Festival, and the lunar New Year.
三个节日过去三五十年前如何兴奋了这地方人，直到现在，还毫无什么变化，仍能成为那地方居民最有意义的几个日子。	These three festival days excited the people here exactly as they had fifty years before.  They were still the days that meant the most.
端午日，当地妇女小孩子，莫不穿了新衣，额角上用雄黄蘸酒画了个王字。	At the Dragon Boat Festival on the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, women and children put on new clothes and painted the character wang, or "king," on their foreheads using wine mixed with realgar.
任何人家到了这天必可以吃鱼吃肉。大约上午十一点钟左右，全茶峒人就吃了午饭，把饭吃过后，在城里住家的，莫不倒锁了门，全家出城到河边看划船。	Everybody got to eat fish and meat this day. By eleven o'clock in the morning, all Chadong was sitting down to lunch, after which those who lived in town locked their doors and went down to the riverside to see the dragon boats race.
河街有熟人的，可到河街吊脚楼门口边看，不然就站在税关门口与各个码头上看。	If they knew people on River Street, they could watch from the houses on stilts overhanging the river. Otherwise, they watched from in front of the customs house or from one of the many piers.
河中龙船以长潭某处作起点，税关前作终点。作比赛竞争。	The dragon boat race began downstream at the Long Depths stretch of the river. The finish line was in front of the customs house.
因为这一天军官税官以及当地有身分的人，莫不在税关前看热闹。	The local military officers, customs officials, and all people of importance gathered at the customs house this day to take in the excitement.
划船的事各人在数天以前就早有了准备，分组分帮各自选出了若干身体结实手脚伶俐的小伙子，在潭中练习进退。	The oarsmen had prepared for the race days in advance, with each competing team selecting its strongest and nimblest young lads to practice their maneuvers in the deep part of the river.
船只的形式，与平常木船大不相同，形体一律又长又狭，两头高高翘起，船身绘着朱红颜色长线，平常时节多搁在河边干燥洞穴里，要用它时，拖下水去。	The dragon boats were longer and narrower than ordinary wooden boats, with upturned ends and a long vermilion stripe painted on the hull.  Most of the year they were stored in dry caves by the river.  When it came time to use them, they were towed out into the water.
每只船可坐十二个到十八个桨手，一个带头的，一个鼓手，一个锣手。	Each boat sat twelve to eighteen oarsmen, a helmsman, and two men to beat the drum and gong.
桨手每人持一支短桨，随了鼓声缓促为节拍，把船向前划去。	The oarsmen's short paddles rowed the boat forward to the rhythm of the drumbeats  first unhurried, then urgent.
坐在船头上，头上缠裹着红布包头，手上拿两支小令旗，左右挥动，指挥船只的进退。	The red-turbaned cox sat in the prow waving two little signal flags left and right, directing the motion of the boat.
擂鼓打锣的，多坐在船只的中部，船一划动便即刻蓬蓬镗镗把锣鼓很单纯的敲打起来，为划桨水手调理下桨节拍。	The men who pounded the drum and beat the gong usually sat amidships.  The moment the boat launched, they started up the single-minded booming and clanging that governed the speed with which the boatmen thrust their oars into the river.
一船快慢既不得不靠鼓声，故每当两船竞赛到剧烈时，鼓声如雷鸣，加上两岸人呐喊助威，便使人想起梁红玉老鹳河时水战擂鼓，牛皋水擒杨么时也是水战擂鼓。	The boat's speed had to follow the sound of the drum and gong, so whenever two boats got to the climax of their competition, the thunder of the percussion, added to the encouraging cheers from both banks, recalled novels and stories about Liang Hongyu beating her drum in the historic naval battle at Laoguan River, and the cacophony when Niu Gao fished the rebel Yang Yao out of the water.
凡把船划到前面一点的，必可在税关前领赏，一匹红，一块小银牌，不拘缠挂到船上某一个人头上去，皆显出这一船合作的光荣。	All who rowed their boat to victory were rewarded at the finish line in front of the customs house with red silk and a little silver badge, not just for their individual efforts but to acknowledge the boat's glorious teamwork.
好事的军人，且当每次某一只船胜利时，必在水边放些表示胜利庆祝的五百响鞭炮。	Soldiers used to taking things into their own hands felt compelled to congratulate the victorious boat by setting off strings of five-hundred-pop firecrackers.
赛船过后，城中的戍军长官，为了与民同乐，增加这节日的愉快起见，便把三十只绿头长颈大雄鸭，颈膊上缚了红布条子，放入河中，尽善于泅水的军民人等，下水追赶鸭子。	After the race, the garrison soldiers and officers in town, to make common cause with the citizenry and increase the merriment of all concerned, released green-headed drakes out on the river with red ribbons tied around their long necks, so that the best swimmers, be they soldiers or civilians, could jump into the river and catch them.
不拘谁把鸭子捉到，谁就成为这鸭子的主人。	Anyone who captured a duck got to keep it.
于是长潭换了新的花样，水面各处是鸭子，各处有追赶鸭子的人。	Thereupon the river at Long Depths hosted a unique spectacle: a stream simply covered with ducks  and people swimming after them.
船与船的竞赛，人与鸭子的竞赛，直到天晚方能完事。	These competitions, of boat against boat and man against duck, went on until the day was done.
掌水码头的龙头大哥顺顺，年青时节便是一个泅水的高手，入水中去追逐鸭子，在任何情形下总不落空。	Dragon Head Elder Brother Shunshun, now boss of the riverfront, had been an expert swimmer in his youth.  When he dove into the water to catch a drake, he never went home empty-handed.
但一到次子傩送年过十二岁时，已能入水闭铺汆着到鸭子身边，再忽然从水中冒水而出，把鸭子捉到，这作爸爸的便解嘲似的说：「好，这种事有你们来作，我不必再下水了。」于是当真就不下水与人来竞争捉鸭子。但下水救人呢，当作别论。	But it came to be that during one festival, when his younger son, Nuosong, had turned eleven and was able to hold his breath long enough to swim to a drake under water and catch him by surprise, the father said to his son, a little defensively, "All right, it's up to you two now, no need for me to dive in anymore!" And that was the end of his jumping into the water to compete in catching ducks. Diving in to save a life, of course, was a different matter.
凡帮助人远离患难，便是入火，人到八十岁，也还是成为这个人一种不可逃避的责任！	He would jump into fire itself to save a person from calamity.  You could be sure he would consider it his bounden duty even when he was eighty!
天保傩送两人皆是当地泅水划船好选手。	Now Tianbao and Nuosong were the best rowers around, the top picks.
端午又快来了，初五划船，河街上初一开会，就决定了属于河街的那只船当天入水。	The Dragon Boat Festival on the fifth of the month was about to come around, so a big meeting was held on River Street on the first.  The neighborhood decided then to launch the boat that belonged to their street.
天保恰好在那天应向上行，随了陆路商人过川东龙潭送节货，故参加的就只傩送。	It happened that Tianbao was on an upcountry journey that day, accompanying merchants on the land route to East Sichuan to sell festival goods in Longtan.  Only Nuosong could attend the meeting.
十六个结实如牛犊的小伙子，带了香烛、鞭炮、同一个用生牛皮蒙好绘有朱红太极图的高脚鼓，到了搁船的河上游山洞边，烧了香烛，把船拖入水后，各人上了船，燃着鞭炮，擂着鼓，这船便如一枝箭似的，很迅速的向下游长潭射去。	Sixteen strapping young men, strong as oxen, journeyed upriver to the mountain cave where the boats were hidden, carrying incense, candles, firecrackers, and a drum on legs, whose rawhide drumheads had the circular yin-yang symbol painted in vermilion.  Ceremoniously, they lit incense and candles and pulled their boat into the river.  Then they boarded it, exploding firecrackers and beating the drum.  The boat swept downstream, swift as an arrow, to the Long Depths.
那时节还是上午，到了午后，对河渔人的龙船也下了水，两只龙船就开始预习种种竞赛的方法。	That was in the morning.  After noon, the dragon boat of the fisher folk on the other shore was launched, too; the two boats began to practice all sorts of competitive maneuvers.
水面上第一次听到了鼓声，许多人从这鼓声中，感到了节日临近的欢悦。	The very first drumbeats coming from the river brought joy to those who heard them, a sign that the festival was close at hand.
住临河吊脚楼对远方人有所等待有所盼望的，也莫不因鼓声想到远人。	Denizens of the houses on stilts near the river began to think of their man's return, or began to hope for it, or at the very least were stimulated by the drumming to remember him.
在这个节日里，必然有许多船只可以赶回，也有许多船只只合在半路过节，这之间，便有些眼目所难见的人事哀乐，在这小山城河街间，让一些人铺事，也让一些人皱眉。	Many boats would be home for the festival, but others would have to pass the day away from home.  This was a time when you could see feelings of delight and sorrow you ordinarily didn't get to see.  Along the River Street of this little mountain town, some people were beaming; others were frowning.
蓬蓬鼓声掠水越山到了渡船头那里时，最先注意到的是那只黄狗。	When the booming of the drums skimmed over the water and crossed the hills to the ferryboat, the first to hear it was the yellow dog.
那黄狗汪汪的吠着，受了惊似的绕屋乱走，有人过渡时，便随船渡过河东岸去，且跑到那小山头向城里一方面大吠。	Startled, he ran wildly around the house in circles, yapping all the way. When someone ferried across the stream to the eastern bank, he followed and ran up the hill with them, barking toward the town.
翠翠正坐在门外大石上用棕叶编蚱蜢蜈蚣玩，见黄狗先在太阳下睡着，忽然醒来便发疯似的乱跑，过了河又回来，就问它骂它：	Cuicui was sitting on the great rocky bluffs outside her door, weaving grasshoppers and centipedes from palm leaves to amuse herself, when she saw the yellow dog suddenly awaken from his sleep under the sun and run around as if possessed, then cross the stream and come back. She scolded him,
「狗，狗，你做什么！不许这样子！」	"Hey there, dog! What's gotten into you? Stop it!"
可是一会儿那声音被她发现了，她于是也绕屋跑着，且同黄狗一块儿渡过了小溪，站在小山头听了许久，让那点迷人的鼓声，把自己带到一个过去的节日里去。	But soon she made out the sound herself. She, too, ran around the house, then ferried herself and the dog across the stream, where she stood with him on the hilltop and listened for the longest time, letting those entrancing drumbeats carry her away to a festival in the past.
第四章	CHAPTER FOUR
还是两年前的事。五月端阳，渡船头祖父找人作了代替，便带了黄狗同翠翠进城，过大河边去看划船。	It was two years earlier: at festival time, on the fifth day of the fifth month, Grandpa found someone to replace him at the ferry and took the yellow dog and Cuicui into town to see the boat race.
河边站满了人，四只朱色长船在潭中划着，龙船水刚刚涨过，河中水皆豆绿，天气又那么明朗，鼓声蓬蓬响着，翠翠抿着嘴一句话不说，心中充满了不可言说的快乐。	The riverbanks were crowded with people as four long, red boats slipped across the river depths.  The "Dragon Boat tide" that raised the waters, the pea-green color of the stream, the bright, clear day, and the booming of the drums had Cuicui pursing her lips in silence, though her heart swelled with inexpressible joy.
河边人太多了一点，各人皆尽张着眼睛望河中，不多久，黄狗还在身边，祖父却挤得不见了。	It was so crowded, with everyone straining to see what was happening on the river, that before long, though the yellow dog remained at Cuicui's side, Grandpa was jostled away out of sight.
翠翠一面注意划船，一面心想「过不久祖父总会找来的」。	Cuicui kept watching the boat race, thinking to herself that her grandfather was bound to come back soon.
但过了许久，祖父还不来，翠翠便稍稍有点儿着慌了。	But a long time passed and he failed to return.  Cuicui began to feel a little panicky.
先是两人同黄狗进城前一天，祖父就问翠翠：「明天城里划船，倘若一个人去看，人多怕不怕？」翠翠就说：「人多我不怕，但自己只是一个人可不好玩。」于是祖父想了半天，方想起一个住在城中的老熟人，赶夜里到城里去商量，请那老人来看一天渡船，自己却陪翠翠进城玩一天。	When the two of them had come to town the day before with the yellow dog, Grandpa had asked Cuicui, "Tomorrow is the boat race: if you go into town by yourself to see it, will you be afraid of the crowd?" Cuicui replied, "Crowds don't scare me, but it's no fun to watch the race by yourself." At that, her grandfather thought it over and finally remembered an old friend in town. He went that night to ask the old man to come tend the ferryboat for the day so he could bring Cuicui to town.
且因为那人比渡船老人更孤单，身边无一个亲人，也无一只狗，因此便约好了那人早上过家中来吃饭，喝一杯雄黄酒。	Since the other man was even more alone than the old ferryman, without a relative to his name  not even a dog  it was agreed that he'd come over in the morning for a meal and a cup of realgar wine.
第二天那人来了，吃了饭，把职务委托那人以后，翠翠等便进了城。	The next day arrived; with the meal finished and the ferry duty handed over to the other man, Cuicui and her family entered the town.
到路上时，祖父想起什么似的，又问翠翠，「翠翠，翠翠，人那么多，好热闹，你一个人敢到河边看龙船吗？」	It occurred to Grandpa to ask along the way, once again: "Cuicui, with so many people down there, and so much commotion, do you dare go down to the riverbank to watch the dragon boats alone?"
翠翠说：「怎么不敢？可是一个人有什么意思。」到了河边后，长潭里的四只红船，把翠翠的注意力完全占去了，身边祖父似乎也可有可无了。祖父心想：「时间还早，到收场时，至少还得三个时刻。溪边的那个朋友，也应当来看看年青人的热闹，回去一趟，换换地位还赶得及。」	Cuicui answered, "Of course I do! But what's the point of watching it alone?" Once they got to the river, the four vermilion boats at Long Depths mesmerized Cuicui. She forgot all about her grandfather. He thought to himself, "This will take some time; it'll be another three hours before it's over. My friend back at the ferry deserves to see the young people whoop it up. I ought to go back and trade places with him.  There's plenty of time."
因此就问翠翠，「人太多了，站在这里看，不要动，我到别处去有事情，无论如何总赶得回来伴你回家。」翠翠正为两只竞速并进的船迷着，祖父说的话毫不思索就答应了。	So he told Cuicui, "It's crowded, so you stay right in this spot. I have to go do something, but I'll be sure to get back in time to take you home." Cuicui was spellbound by the sight of two boats racing prow-to-prow, so she agreed without taking in what her grandpa had said.
祖父知道黄狗在翠翠身边，也许比他自己在她身边还稳当，于是便回家看船去了。	Realizing that the yellow dog at Cuicui's side might well be more reliable than he, the old man returned home to the ferry.
祖父到了那渡船处时，见代替他的老朋友，正站在白塔下注意听远处鼓声。	When he arrived, Grandpa saw his old friend standing below the white pagoda, listening to the distant sound of the drums.
祖父喊他，请他把船拉过来，两人渡过小溪仍然站到白塔下去。	Grandpa hailed him to bring the boat over so the two could ferry across the brook and stand under the pagoda together.
那人问老船夫为什么又跑回来，祖父就说想替他一会儿故把翠翠留在河边，自己赶回来，好让他也过河边去看看热闹，且说，「看得好，就不必再回来，只须见了翠翠问她一声，翠翠到时自会回家的。小丫头不敢回家，你就伴她走走」	The friend asked why the old ferryman had returned in such a hurry.  Grandpa told him he wanted to spell him a while.  He'd left Cuicui by the shore so his friend could also enjoy the excitement down at the big river. He added, "If you like the spectacle, no need to return, just tell Cuicui to come home when it's over. If my little girl is afraid to come by herself, you can accompany her back!"
但那替手对于看龙船已无什么兴味，却愿意同老船夫在这溪边大石上各自再喝两杯烧酒。	Grandpa's stand-in had long ago lost any interest in watching dragon boats; he'd rather stay here with the ferryman on the big bluffs by the stream and drink a cup or two of wine.
老船夫十分高兴，把葫芦取出，推给城中来的那一个。	The old ferryman was quite happy to hear that.  He took out his gourd of wine and gave it to his friend from town.
两人一面谈些端午旧事，一面喝酒，不到一会，那人却在岩石上为烧酒醉倒了。	They reminisced about Dragon Boat Festivals past as they drank.  Pretty soon the friend drank himself to sleep, out on the rock.
人既醉倒了，无从入城，祖父为了责任又不便与渡船离开，留在河边的翠翠便不能不着急了。	Having succumbed to the liquor, he could hardly return to town. Grandpa couldn't very well abandon his post at the ferry, either. Cuicui, who was stranded at the river, began to worry.
河中划船的决了最后胜负后，城里军官已派人驾小船在潭中放了一群鸭子，祖父还不见来。	The boat race achieved its final outcome and the military officers in town sent a boat into the Long Depths to release the ducks.  Still Grandpa was nowhere to be seen.
翠翠恐怕祖父也正在什么地方等着她，因此带了黄狗各处人丛中挤着去找寻祖父，结果还是不得祖父的踪迹。	Fearing that her grandfather might be waiting for her somewhere else, Cuicui and the yellow dog made their way through the crowd, and still there was no trace of him.
后来看看天快要黑了，军人扛了长凳出城看热闹的，皆已陆续扛了那凳子回家。	Soon it would be twilight.  All the soldiers from town who'd come hefting benches to watch the commotion had shouldered them now and returned home, one by one.
潭中的鸭子只剩下三五只，捉鸭人也渐渐的少了。	Only three or four ducks remained at liberty in the river.  The number of people chasing them was dwindling, too.
落日向上游翠翠家中那一方落去，黄昏把河面装饰了一层薄雾。	The sun was setting, in the direction of Cuicui's home upstream.  Dusk draped the river in a thin coat of mist.
翠翠望到这个景致，忽然起了一个怕人的想头，她想：「假若爷爷死了？」	A terrible thought suddenly occurred to Cuicui as she surveyed this scene: "Could Grandpa be dead?"
她记起祖父嘱咐她不要离开原来地方那一句话，便又为自己解释这想头的错误，以为祖父不来必是进城去或到什么熟人处去，被人拉着喝酒，故一时不能来的。	Keeping in mind that Grandpa had asked her to stay in this spot, she tried to disprove the awful thought to herself by imagining that he must have gone into town and run into an acquaintance, maybe been dragged off to have a drink.  That was why he hadn't come back.
正因为这也是可能的事，她又不愿在天未断黑以前，同黄狗赶回家去，只好站在那石码头边等候祖父。	Because it really was a possibility, she didn't want to leave for home with the yellow dog when it wasn't completely dark yet.  She could only keep on waiting for her grandpa there by the stone pier.
再过一会，对河那两只长船已泊到对河小溪里去不见了，看龙船的人也差不多全散了。	Soon two long boats from the other shore moved into a small tributary and disappeared.  Nearly all the spectators had dispersed, too.
吊脚楼有娼妓的人家，已上了灯，且有人敲小斑鼓弹月琴唱曲子。	The prostitutes in the houses on stilts lit their lanterns and some of them were already singing to the sound of tambourines and lutes.
另外一些人家，又有划拳行酒的吵嚷声音。	From other establishments came the raucous shouting of men drinking during the guess-fingers game.
同时停泊在吊脚楼下的一些船只，上面也有人在摆酒炒菜，把青菜萝卜之类，倒进滚热油锅里去时发出唦－－的声音。	Meanwhile, in boats moored below the stilt houses, people were frying up dishes for a feast; greens and turnips sizzled in oil as they plopped into their woks.
河面已朦朦胧胧，看去好像只有一只白鸭在潭中浮着，也只剩一个人追着这只鸭子。	The river was already obscured by the misty darkness.  Only a solitary white duck was still afloat on the river, with just one person chasing it.
翠翠还是不离开码头，总相信祖父会来找她，同她一起回家。	Cuicui stayed by the dockside, still believing that her grandfather would come to take her home.
吊脚楼上唱曲子声音热闹了一些，只听到下面船上有人说话，一个水手说：「金亭，你听你那铺子陪川东庄客喝酒唱曲子，我赌个手指，说这是她的声音！」	As the strains of song coming from the stilt houses grew louder, she heard talking on a boat below, and a boatman saying, "Jinting, listen, that's your whore, singing to some merchant from Sichuan while he downs his liquor! I'll bet a finger on it, that's her voice!"
另一个水手就说：「她陪他们喝酒唱曲子，心里可想我。她知道我在船上！」	Another boatman replied, "Even when she sings drinking songs for other men, she's still thinking of me! She knows I'm in this boat!"
先前那一个又说：「身体让别人玩着，心还想着你；你有什么凭据？」另一个说：「有凭据。」于是这水手吹着呼哨，作出一个古怪的记号，一会儿，楼上歌声便停止了。歌声停止后，两个水手皆笑了。两人接着便说了些关于那个女人的一切，使用了不少粗鄙字眼，翠翠很不习惯把这种话听下去，但又不能走开。且听水手之一说，楼上妇人的爸爸是在棉花坡被人杀死的，一共杀了十七刀。	The first added, "So she gives her body to other people, but her heart stays with you? How do you know?" The other said, "I'll prove it to you!" Whereupon he gave a strange whistle. The singing above stopped, and the boatmen had a good laugh. They had a good deal to say about the woman after that, much of it obscene. Cuicui was not used to such language, but she couldn't leave the spot.  Not only that, she heard one of the boatmen say that the woman's father had been stabbed at Cotton Ball Slope  seventeen times.
翠翠心中那个古怪的想头，「爷爷死了呢？」便仍然占据到心里有一忽儿。	That uncomfortable thought suddenly seized her again: "Could Grandpa be dead?"
两个水手还正在谈话，潭中那只白鸭慢慢的向翠翠所在的码头边游来，翠翠想：「再过来些我就捉住你！」	As the boatmen continued conversing, the remaining white drake in the pool swam slowly toward the pier where Cuicui stood. She thought to herself, "Come any closer and I'll catch you!"
于是静静的等着，但那鸭子将近岸边三丈远近时，却有个人笑着，喊那船上水手。	She kept waiting there quietly, but when the duck came within ten yards of the shore, someone laughed and hailed the sailors on the boat.
原来水中还有个人，那人已把鸭子捉到手，却慢慢的「踹水」游近岸边的。	A third person was still in the water.  He grabbed the duck and was slowly making his way to shore, treading water.
船上人听到水面的喊声，在隐约里也喊道：「二老，二老，你真干，你今天得了五只吧。」那水上人说：「这家伙狡猾得很，现在可归我了。」「你这时捉鸭子，将来捉女人，一定有同样的本领。」水上那一个不再说什么，手脚并用的拍着水傍了码头。湿淋淋的爬上岸时，翠翠身旁的黄狗，彷佛警问水中人似的，汪汪的叫了几声，那人方注意到翠翠。	Hearing the shouting from the river, a man on the boat yelled back into the murky haze, "Hey, No. 2, you're really something! That's the fifth one you've bagged today." The one in the water replied, "This character was really clever, but I caught him anyway." "It's ducks for you today, and tomorrow women  I'll bet you'll be just as good at that." The one in the water fell silent and swam up to the pier. As he climbed up onshore, dripping wet, the yellow dog at Cuicui's side yapped at him as a warning. It was then that he noticed Cuicui.
码头上已无别的人，那人问：	She was the only one on the dock now.
「是谁？」	"Who are you?" he asked.
「是翠翠！」	"Cuicui."
「翠翠又是谁？」	"And who might that be?"
「是碧溪岨撑渡船的孙女。」	"The granddaughter of the ferryman at Bixiju, Green Creek Hill."
「你在这儿做什么？」	"What are you doing here?"
「我等我爷爷。我等他来好回家去。」	"Waiting for my grandpa. He's coming to get me."
「等他来他可不会来，你爷爷一定到城里军营里喝了酒，醉倒后被人抬回去了！」	"It doesn't look like he's coming. Your grandfather must have gone into town for a drink at the army barracks. I'll bet he passed out and someone carried him home!"
「他不会。他答应来，他就一定会来的。」	"He wouldn't do any such thing. He said he'd come get me, so that's what he'll do."
「这里等也不成。到我家里去，到那边点了灯的楼上去，等爷爷来找你好不好？」	"This is no place to wait for him. Come up to my house, over there where the lamps are lit. You can wait for him there. How about that?"
翠翠误会邀他进屋里去那个人的好意，正记着水手说的妇人丑事，她以为那男子就是要她上有女人唱歌的楼上去，本来从不骂人，这时正因等候祖父太久了，心中焦急得很，听人要她上去，以为欺侮了她，就轻轻的说：	Cuicui mistook his good intentions in inviting her to his home. Recalling the revolting things the sailors had said about that woman, she thought the boy wanted her to go up into one of those houses with the singing girls. She'd never cursed before, but she was on edge, having waited so long for her grandfather. When she heard herself invited to go upstairs to his home, she felt insulted and said, softly,
「你个悖时砍脑壳的！」	"Damned low-life! You're headed for the executioner!"
话虽轻轻的，那男的却听得出，且从声音上听得出翠翠年纪，便带笑说：「怎么，你骂人！你不愿意上去，要待在这儿，回头水里大鱼来咬了你，可不要叫喊！」	She said it under her breath, but the boy heard it, and he could tell from her voice how young she was. He smiled at her and said, "What, are you cursing me? If you want to wait here instead of coming with me, and a big fish comes up and bites you, don't expect me to rescue you!"
翠翠说：「鱼咬了我也不管你的事。」	Cuicui answered, "If a fish does bite me, that's nothing to you."
那黄狗好像明白翠翠被人欺侮了，又汪汪的吠起来。	As if aware that Cuicui had been insulted, the yellow dog began barking again.
那男子把手中白鸭举起，向黄狗吓了一下，便走上河街去了。	The boy lunged at the dog with the duck to scare him, then walked off toward River Street.
黄狗为了自己被欺侮还想追过去，翠翠便喊：「狗，狗，你叫人也看人叫！」	The dog wanted to chase him, having now been insulted himself, when Cuicui yelled, "Hey, boy, save your barks for when they're needed!"
翠翠意思彷佛只在问给狗「那轻薄男子还不值得叫」，但男子听去的却是另外一种好意，男的以为是她要狗莫向好人叫，放肆的笑着，不见了。	Her meaning seemed to be, "That joker isn't worth barking at," but the young man thought he heard something else, to the effect that the dog should not bark at a well-meaning person. He was wreathed in smiles as he disappeared from view.
又过了一阵，有人从河街拿了一个废缆做成的火炬，喊叫着翠翠的名字来找寻她，到身边时翠翠却不认识那个人。	A while later, someone came over from River Street to fetch Cuicui, bearing a torch made from leftover rope and calling her name.  But when she saw his face, Cuicui didn't recognize him.
那人说：老船夫回到家中，不能来接她，故搭了过渡人口信来，问翠翠要她即刻就回去。	He explained that the old ferryman had gone home and could not come to retrieve her, so he'd sent a message back with a passenger for Cuicui to return home at once.
翠翠听说是祖父派来的，就同那人一起回家，让打火把的在前引路，黄狗时前时后，一同沿了城墙向渡口走去。	When Cuicui heard that her grandfather had sent the man, she went home with him, skirting the city wall and letting him lead the way with his torch.  The yellow dog sometimes went in front, sometimes in back.
翠翠一面走一面问那拿火把的人，是谁问他就知道她在河边。	Along the way, Cuicui asked the man how he'd known she was still there by the river.
那人说是二老问他的，他是二老家里的伙计，送翠翠回家后还得回转河街。	He said No. 2 had told him; he worked in No. 2's household.  When he got her home, he'd have to return to River Street.
翠翠说：「二老他怎么知道我在河边？」	Cuicui asked, "How did No. 2 know I was there?"
那人便笑着说：「他从河里捉鸭子回来，在码头上见你，他说好意请你上家里坐坐，等候你爷爷，你还骂过他！」	Her guide smiled and said, "He was out on the river catching ducks and he saw you by the dock on his way home. He asked you, innocently enough, to go home and sit a while in his house until your grandpa came, but you swore at him! And your dog barked at him, having no idea who he was!"
翠翠带了点儿惊讶轻轻的问：「二老是谁？」	Surprised at this, Cuicui asked, softly, "Who is No. 2?"
那人也带了点儿惊讶说：「二老你都不知道？就是我们河街上的傩送二老！就是岳云！他要我送你回去！」傩送二老在茶峒地方不是一个生疏的名字！	Now it was the worker's turn to be surprised: "You've never heard of No. 2? He's Nuosong! We call him No. 2 on River Street. He's our Yue Yun! And he asked me to take you home!" Nuosong was not an unfamiliar name in Chadong!
翠翠想起自己先前骂人那句话，心里又吃惊又害羞，再也不说什么，默默的随了那火把走去。	When Cuicui thought of her curse words a while ago, she felt stunned and also ashamed. There was nothing she could say. She followed the torchbearer silently.
翻过了小山岨，望得见对溪家中火光时，那一方面也看见了翠翠方面的火把，老船夫即刻把船拉过来，一面拉船一面哑声儿喊问：「翠翠，翠翠，是不是你？	When they'd rounded the hill and could see the lamplight in the house across the stream, the ferryman spotted the torchlight where Cuicui was.
」翠翠不理会祖父，口中却轻轻的说：「不是翠翠，不是翠翠，翠翠早被大河里鲤鱼吃去了。」翠翠上了船，二老派来的人，打着火把走了，祖父牵着船问：「翠翠，你怎么不答应我，生我的气了吗？」	He immediately set out with his boat, calling out in his hoarse voice, "Cuicui, Cuicui, is it you?" Cuicui didn't answer her grandpa, but only said, under her breath, "No, it's not Cuicui, not her, Cuicui was eaten by a big fish in the river long ago." When she was in the boat, the man sent by No. 2 left with his torch. Grandpa pulled on the ferry cable and asked, "Cuicui, why didn't you answer me? Are you angry at me?"
翠翠站在船头还是不作声。	Cuicui stood in the prow and still said not a word.
翠翠对祖父那一点儿埋怨，等到把船拉过了溪，一到了家中，看明白了醉倒的另一个老人后，就完事了。	Her irritation at her granddad dissipated when she got home across the creek and saw how drunk the other old man was.
但另一件事，属于自己不关祖父的，却使翠翠沉默了一个夜晚。	But something else, which had to do with her and not her grandfather, kept Cuicui in silence through the rest of the night.
第五章	CHAPTER FIVE
两年日子过去了。	Two years passed.
这两年来两个中秋节，恰好都无月亮可看，凡在这边城地方，因看月而起整夜男女唱歌的故事，皆不能如期举行，故两个中秋留给翠翠的印象，极其平淡无奇。	It happened that during neither of those years' Mid-autumn Festivals, when the moon should have been at its fullest, was there any moon to be seen.  None of the exploits of young girls and boys singing love songs to each other all night under the moonlight, customary in this border town, could take place.  Hence the two Mid-autumn Festivals had made only a very faint impression on Cuicui.
两个新年却照例可以看到军营里与各乡来的狮子龙灯，在小教场迎春，锣鼓喧阗很热闹。	But during the last two New Year's celebrations, she could see soldiers and villagers put on lion dances and processions of dragon lanterns on the parade grounds to welcome in the spring.  The sound of the drums and gongs was exciting and raucous.
到了十五夜晚，城中舞龙耍狮子的镇筸兵士，还各自赤裸着肩膊，往各处去欢迎炮仗烟火。	At the end of the festival on the evening of the fifteenth of the first month, the garrison soldiers who had frolicked inside the lions and dragons traveled all over, bare-chested, braving the fireworks.
城中军营里，税关局长公馆，河街上一些大字号，莫不预先截老毛竹筒，或镂空棕榈树根株，用洞硝拌和磺炭钢砂，一千捶八百捶把烟火做好。	At the army encampment in town, at the residence of the head customs inspector, and in some of the bigger establishments on River Street, everyone cut thin bamboos or hollowed out palm tree roots and stems, then mixed saltpeter with sulfur, charcoal, and steel powder to make thousand-pop firecrackers.
好勇取乐的军士，光赤着个上身，玩着灯打着鼓来了，小鞭炮如落雨的样子，从悬到长竿尖端的空中落到玩灯的肩背上，锣鼓催动急促的拍子，大家皆为这事情十分兴奋。	Daring and fun-loving soldiers, stripped to the waist, came waving their lanterns and beating their drums as packs of little firecrackers dangling from poles sent sparks down their backs and shoulders like rain showers.
鞭炮放过一阵后，用长凳绑着的大筒灯火，在敞坪一端燃起了引线，先是丝丝的流泻白光，慢慢的这白光便吼啸起来，作出如雷如虎惊人的声音，白光向上空冲去，高至二十丈，下落时便洒散着满天花雨。	The quickening beat of drums and gongs sent the crowd into a frenzy.  When the bursts of firecrackers were over, the crowd fired rockets from great tubes anchored to the feet of long benches, setting them off with fuses that extended into an open field.  First came a white light with a sizzle.  Slowly, slowly, the sizzle changed into a great howl, like a frightening clap of thunder and the roar of a tiger, as the white light shot up two hundred feet into the air.  Then it showered the whole sky with multicolored sparks thick as droplets of rain.
玩灯的兵士，在火花中绕着圈子，俨然毫不在意的样子。	The soldiers brandishing lanterns went around in circles, oblivious to the sparks.
翠翠同他的祖父，也看过这样的热闹，留下一个热闹的印象，但这印象不知为什么原因，总不如那个端午所经过的事情甜而美。	Cuicui witnessed this excitement with her grandfather and it made an impression on her, but inexplicably, it was not as sweet and beautiful as that left by the day of the dragon boats two years before.
翠翠为了不能忘记那件事，上年一个端午又同祖父到城边河街去看了半天船，一切玩得正好时，忽然落了行雨，无人衣衫不被雨湿透。	Unable to forget that day, Cuicui had gone back to River Street with her grandpa the year before and watched the boats for some time.  Just when everything was going fine, it suddenly began to rain, soaking everyone to the bone.
为了避雨，祖孙二人同那只黄狗，走到顺顺吊脚楼上去，挤在一个角隅里。	To escape the rain, grandfather and granddaughter, with the yellow dog, had gone up into Shunshun's stilt house, where they crowded into a corner.
有人扛凳子从身边过去，翠翠认得那人是去年打了火把送她回家的人，就告给祖父：	Someone passed by them carrying a stool; Cuicui recognized him as the man with the torch who had led her home.  She said to her grandfather:
「爷爷，那个人去年送我回家，他拿了火把走路时，真像个喽啰！」	"Grandfather, that's the man who brought me home last year. Walking along the path with a torch like that, he was just like a highwayman!"
祖父当时不作声，等到那人回头又走过面前时，就一把抓住那个人，笑嘻嘻说：	At first Grandpa said nothing, but when the man turned his head and approached, the ferryman grabbed him and said, grinning widely,
「嗨嗨，你这个人！要你到我家喝一杯也不成，还怕酒里有毒，把你这个真命天子毒死！」	"Hey, there, you old highwayman, I asked you to stay for a drink but you wouldn't stay put! Were you afraid of poison? Did you think I dared to slay a true-born Son of Heaven?"
那人一看是守渡船的，且看到了翠翠，就笑了。	When the man saw that it was the ferryman, and then caught sight of Cuicui, he grinned.
「翠翠，你大长了！二老说你在河边大鱼会吃你，我们这里河中的鱼，现在可吞不下你了。」	"Cuicui, how you've grown! No. 2 said a big fish might eat you if you stayed by the riverbank, but our river doesn't have any fish big enough to swallow you now!"
翠翠一句话不说，只是抿起嘴唇笑着。	Cuicui said not a word. She puckered her lips and smiled.
这一次虽在这喽啰长年口中听到个「二老」名字，却不曾见及这个人。	She heard this old highwayman speak No. 2's name, but the boy was nowhere to be seen.
从祖父与那长年谈话里，翠翠听明白了二老是在下游六百里外青浪滩过端午的。	From the conversation between her grandfather and the other elder, Cuicui gathered that No. 2 was spending the Dragon Boat Festival two hundred miles downstream, at the Qinglang or Green Foam Rapids of the River Yuan.
但这次不见二老却认识了「大老」，且见着了那个一地出名的顺顺。	But this festival she got to see No. 1 and also the famous Shunshun.
大老把河中的鸭子捉回家里后，因为守渡船的老家伙称赞了那只肥鸭两次，顺顺就要大老把鸭子给翠翠。	The old ferryman praised a fat duck that No. 1 brought home after catching it on the river, praised it twice, so Shunshun told him to give it to Cuicui.
且知道祖孙二人所过的日子十分拮据，节日里自己不能包粽子，又送了许多尖角粽子。	And when he learned how hard up their household was  too poor to wrap their own zongzi dumplings for the festival  he gave them a big lot of the three-cornered treats.
那水上名人同祖父谈话时，翠翠虽装作眺望河中景致，耳朵却把每一句话听得清清楚楚。	While that notable of the waterways conversed with her grandfather, Cuicui pretended to be looking at the events in the river, but really she was taking in every word.
那人向祖父说翠翠长得很美，问过翠翠年纪，又问有不有人家。	The other man said that Cuicui had grown quite beautiful.  He asked her age, and whether she was promised to anyone.
祖父则很快乐的夸奖了翠翠不少，且似乎不许别人来关心翠翠的婚事，故一到这件事便闭口不谈。	Her grandfather gleefully bragged about her, but seemed reluctant to broach the topic of her marriage prospects.  He didn't breathe a word about that.
回家时，祖父抱了那只白鸭子同别的东西，翠翠打火把引路。	On the way home, Grandpa carried the white duck and other goods, while Cuicui led the way with a torch.
两人沿城墙走去，一面是城，一面是水。	The two made their way along the foot of the city wall, between the wall and the river.
祖父说：「顺顺真是个好人，大方得很。大老也很好。这一家人都好！」翠翠说：「一家人都好，你认识他们一家人吗？」祖父不明白这句话的意思所在，因为今天太高兴一点，便笑着说：「翠翠，假若大老要你做媳妇，请人来做媒，你答应不答应？」翠翠就说：「爷爷，你疯了！再说我就生你的气！」	Grandpa said: "Shunshun is a good man, extremely generous. No. 1 is like him. The whole family is quite fine!" Cuicui asked, "Do you know everyone in the family?" Grandpa didn't see what she was driving at. The day had raised his spirits so much that he went ahead and asked, smiling, "Cuicui, if No. 1 wanted to take you as his wife and sent over a matchmaker, would you agree?" Cuicui replied, "Grandfather, you're crazy! Keep on like this and I'll get angry!"
祖父话虽不说了，心中却很显然的还转着这些可笑的不好的念头。	Grandpa said no more, but clearly he was still mulling over this silly and inopportune idea.
翠翠着了恼，把火炬向路两旁乱晃着，向前怏怏的走去了。	Cuicui, aggravated, ran up ahead, swinging the torch wildly from side to side.
「翠翠，莫闹，我摔到河里去，鸭子会走脱的！」	"Don't be angry, Cuicui, I might fall into the river. This duck might get away!"
「谁也不希罕那只鸭子！」	"Who wants that old duck?"
祖父明白翠翠为什么事不高兴，祖父便唱起摇橹人驶船下滩时催橹的歌声，声音虽然哑沙沙的，字眼儿却稳稳当当毫不含糊。	Realizing why she was angry, Grandpa began singing a shanty the oarsmen used to speed their rowing while they shot the rapids.
翠翠一面听着一面向前走去，忽然停住了发问：	His voice was rasping, but the words were clear as could be.  Cuicui kept going as she listened, then suddenly stopped and asked:
「爷爷，你的船是不是正在下青浪滩呢？」	"Grandfather, is that boat of yours going down the Green Foam Rapids?"
祖父不说什么，还是唱着，两人皆记顺顺家二老的船正在青浪滩过节，但谁也不明白另外一个人的记忆所止处。	Grandpa didn't answer, he just kept on singing.  Both of them recalled that Shunshun's No. 2 was spending the holiday on a boat at the Green Foam Rapids, but neither knew what the other was implying.
祖孙二人便沉默的一直走还家中。	Grandfather and granddaughter walked home in silence.
到了渡口，那代理看船的，正把船泊在岸边等候他们。	As they neared the ferry, the man tending the boat for them brought it to the bank to await their arrival.
几人渡过溪到了家中，剥粽子吃，到后那人要进城去，翠翠赶即为那人点上火把，让他有火把照路。	They crossed the stream to go home, then ate the zongzi.  When it came time for the man to go back to town, Cuicui was quick to light a torch for him so he could see his way home.
人过了小溪上小山时，翠翠同祖父在船上望着，翠翠说：	As he crossed over the hill, Cuicui and her grandfather watched him from the boat.  She said,
「爷爷，看喽啰上山了啊！」	"Grandfather, look, the highwayman has gone back into the hills!"
祖父把手攀引着横缆，注目溪面的薄雾，彷佛看到了什么东西，轻轻的吁了一口气。	As he pulled the boat along the cable, his eyes trained on the mist that had suddenly come up from the stream, Grandpa acted as if he'd seen something and softly sighed.
祖父静静的拉船过对岸家边时，要翠翠先上岸去，自己却守在船边，因为过节，明白一定有乡下人上城里看龙船，还得乘黑赶回家去。	He quietly tugged the boat toward home on the opposite bank and let Cuicui go ashore first, while he stayed by the boat.  It was a festival day.  He knew that country folk would still be returning home in the dark after seeing the dragon boats in town.
第六章	CHAPTER SIX
白日里，老船夫正在渡船上同个卖皮纸的过渡人有所争持。	One day the old ferryman got into an argument with a passenger, a seller of wrapping paper.
一个不能接受所给的钱，一个却非把钱送给老人不可。	The one refused to accept money proffered and the other insisted on paying.
正似乎因为那个过渡人送钱气派，使老船夫受了点压迫，这撑渡船人就俨然生气似的，迫着那人把钱收回，使这人不得不把钱捏在手里。	The old ferryman felt a little bullied by the merchant's attitude, so he put on a show of anger and forced the man to take back his money  pressed the coins right back into his hand.
但船拢岸时，那人跳上了码头，一手铜钱向船舱里一撒，却笑眯眯的匆匆忙忙走了。	But when the boat reached the shore, the traveler jumped up onto the dock and cast a handful of coppers back into the boat, smiling gleefully before hurrying off on his way.
老船夫手还得拉着船让别人上岸，无法去追赶那个人，就喊小山头的女：	The old ferryman had to keep steadying the boat till the other passengers made it ashore, so he couldn't pursue the merchant.  Instead, he called out to his granddaughter, who was up on the hill:
「翠翠，翠翠，帮我拉着那个卖皮纸的小伙子，不许他走！」	"Cuicui, grab hold of that cheeky young paper-seller and don't let him go!"
翠翠不知道是怎么会事，当真便同黄狗去拦那第一个下山人。	Cuicui had no idea what was going on, but she went with the yellow dog to block the way of the first passenger off the boat.
那人笑着说：	He laughed and said,
「不要拦我！－－」	"Let me pass!"
正说着，第二个商人赶来了，就告给翠翠是什么事情。	As he spoke, a second merchant caught up with them and told Cuicui what it was all about.
翠翠明白了，更拉着卖纸人衣服不放，只说：「不许走！不许走！」黄狗为了表示同主人的意见一致，也便在翠翠身边汪汪汪的吠着。其余商人皆笑着，一时不能走路。	She understood and held on to the paper merchant's gown for dear life, insisting, "You can't go, you can't!" To show his agreement with his mistress, the yellow dog, too, began barking at the man. The other traveling merchants were blocked for a while, but they all had a good laugh.
祖父气吁吁的赶来了，把钱强迫塞到那人手心里，且搭了一大束草烟到那商人担子上去，搓着两手笑着说：「走呀！你们上路走！」那些人于是全笑着走了。	Grandpa came up in an angry huff, forced the money back into the man's hand, and even stuck a big wad of tobacco leaves into the merchant's load. He rubbed his hands together and beamed: "Go on, now! Hit the road, all of you!" And at that, they all went on their way, chuckling.
翠翠说：「爷爷，我还以为那人偷你东西同你打架！」	"Grandfather, I thought you were quarreling with that man because he'd stolen from you!" Cuicui said.
祖父就说：	Her grandfather replied,
「他送我好些钱。我才不要这些钱！告他不要钱，他还同我吵，不讲道理！」	"He gave me money, a lot of it. I don't want his money! I told him that and still he bickered with me about it. He just wouldn't listen to reason!"
翠翠说：「全还给他了吗？」	"Did you give it all back to him?" Cuicui asked.
祖父抿着嘴把头摇摇，装成狡猾得意神气笑着，把扎在腰带上留下的那枚单铜子取出，送给翠翠。	Grandpa shook his head and pouted.  Then he winked and smiled knowingly, taking out from his belt the lone copper he had stuffed there.
且说：	He gave it to Cuicui and said,
「他得了我们那把烟叶，可以吃到镇筸城！」远处鼓声又蓬蓬的响起来了，黄狗张着两个耳朵听着。翠翠问祖父，听不听到什么声音。	"He got some tobacco from me in return. He can smoke that all the way to Zhen'gan town!" The pounding of faraway drums could be heard, and the yellow dog pricked up his ears. Cuicui asked Grandpa if he could hear it.
祖父一注意，知道是什么声音了，便说：	He strained his ears and recognized the sound.
「翠翠，端午又来了。你记不记得去年天保大老送你那只肥鸭子。	"Cuicui, the Dragon Boat Festival has come around again. Do you remember how last year Master Tianbao gave you a fat duck to take home?
早上大老同一群人上川东去，过渡时还问你。	This morning First Master went off on business with his crew to East Sichuan.  On the ferry he asked about you.
你一定忘记那次落的行雨。	I'll bet you forgot all about the downpour last year.
我们这次若去，又得打火把回家；你记不记得我们两人用火把照路回家？」	If we go this time, we'll have to light a torch again to come home.  Do you remember how the two of us came home, lighting our way with a torch?"
翠翠还正想起两年前的端午一切事情哪。	Cuicui was just then thinking about the other Dragon Boat Festival, two years ago.
但祖父一问，翠翠却微带点儿恼着的神气，把头摇摇，故意说：「我记不得，我记不得。」其实她那意思就是「我怎么记不得？！」	But when her grandfather asked, she shook her head, slightly annoyed, and said, pointedly: "I don't remember it, not at all. I can't remember anything about it!" What she really meant was, "How could I have forgotten?"
祖父明白那话里意思，又说：「前年还更有趣，你一个人在河边等我，差点儿不知道回来，我还以为大鱼会吃掉你！」	Knowing full well what she really meant, Grandpa added, "The festival two years ago was even more interesting. You waited for me alone by the riverbank. It got dark and you were just about lost. I thought a big fish must have eaten you all up!"
提起旧事翠翠嗤的笑了。	Recalling this, Cuicui snickered.
「爷爷，你还以为大鱼会吃掉我？是别人家说我，我告给你的！	"Grandfather, are you the one who thought a big fish might eat me? It was someone else who said that about me, and I told you!
你那天只是恨不得让城中的那个爷爷把装酒的葫芦吃掉！	All you cared about that day was getting that old man from town to drink all the wine in your gourd!
你这种记性！」	Some memory you have!"
「我人老了，记性也坏透了。翠翠，现在你人长大了，一个人一定敢上城看船，不怕鱼吃掉你了。」	"I'm old and my memory is completely gone. Cuicui, you've grown up now. You'll have no trouble going into town alone to see the boats race. No need to worry about a fish eating you."
「人大了就应当守船哩。」	"Now that I'm older, I ought to stay and mind the ferryboat."
「人老了才当守船。」	"It's when you get really old that you stay with the ferryboat."
「人老了应当歇憩！」	"When you get old, you deserve a rest!"
「你爷爷还可以打老虎，人不老！」祖父说着，于是，把膀子弯曲起来，努力使筋肉在局束中显得又有力又年青，且说：「翠翠，你不信，你咬。」	"Your grandfather isn't so old! I can still hunt tigers!" Grandpa said, flexing his biceps and making a muscle to show how young and strong he still was. "Cuicui, if you don't believe me, see if you can bite through this!"
翠翠睨着腰背微驼白发满头的祖父，不说什么话。	Cuicui cast a sidelong glance at her grandpa, whose back was slightly hunched.  She didn't reply.
远处有吹唢呐的声音，她知道那是什么事情，且知道唢呐方向，要祖父同她下了船，把船拉过家中那边岸旁去。	Far away, she heard the sound of suona horns.  She knew what that meant.  She could tell the direction it was coming from.  She asked her grandpa to get in the boat with her and go to the other side, where their house was.
为了想早早的看到那迎婚送亲的喜轿，翠翠还爬到屋后塔下去眺望。	To get a look at the bride's palanquin at the earliest point, Cuicui climbed the pagoda out back and looked over from above.
过不久，那一伙人来了，两个吹唢呐的，四个强壮乡下汉子，一顶空花轿，一个穿新衣的团总儿子模样的青年，另外还有两只羊，一个牵羊的孩子，一坛酒，一盒餈粑，一个担礼物的人。	Soon the wedding procession arrived: two men playing suonas, four strong peasant lads carrying an empty palanquin to collect the bride, a young man decked out in new clothes, who looked to be the son of a militia captain, two sheep and a young boy leading them, a vat of wine, a box of glutinous rice cakes, and a gift-bearer.
一伙人上了渡船后，翠翠同祖父也上了渡船，祖父拉船，翠翠却傍花轿站定，去欣赏每一个人的脸色与花轿上的流苏。	When the troop boarded the ferryboat, Cuicui and her grandpa joined them.  Grandpa tugged the boat line, while Cuicui stood by the ornately decorated bridal sedan chair, taking note of all the faces in the procession and the tassels on the palanquin.
拢岸后，团总儿子模样的人，从扣花抱肚里掏出了一个小红纸包封，递给老船夫。	When they got to shore, the one who looked like the militia captain's son drew a red envelope with money in it from his embroidered waist pouch and gave it to the old ferryman.
这是规矩，祖父再不能说不接收了。	That was the custom in this locality, so Grandpa could not refuse the gift.
但得了钱祖父却说话了，问那个人，新娘是什么地方人，明白了，又问姓什么，明白了，又问多大年纪，一起皆弄明白了。	But having the money in hand, Grandpa asked the man where the bride was from, her family name, and how old she was.
吹唢呐的一上岸后又把唢呐呜呜喇喇吹起来，一行人便翻山走了。	When he had all this information and the suona players began their haunting melodies again after landing, the file of men crossed over the hill and went on its way.
祖父同翠翠留在船上，感情彷佛皆追着那唢呐声音走去，走了很远的路方回到自己身边来。	Grandpa and Cuicui remained in the boat, their emotions following the sounds of the suonas far into the distance.
祖父掂着那红纸包封的份量说：「翠翠，宋家堡子里新嫁娘只十五岁。」	Weighing the red money packet in his hand, Grandpa said, "Cuicui, the bride is from the Song Family Stockade and she's only fourteen."
翠翠明白祖父这句话的意思所在，不作理会，静静的把船拉动起来。	Cuicui understood his meaning, but paid him no heed. She began quietly to pull the boat across.
到了家边，翠翠跑回家去取小小竹子做的双管唢呐，请祖父坐在船头吹「娘送女」曲子给她听，她却同黄狗躺到门前大岩石上荫处看天上的云。	When they reached the side where their house was, Cuicui rushed home to get their little twin-pipe bamboo suona.  She asked Grandpa to play her the tune "The Mother Sees Her Daughter Off to Marriage." She lay down with the yellow dog in a shady spot on the bluffs in front of the house, where she could watch the clouds in the sky.  The days were getting longer now.
白日渐长，不知什么时节，祖父睡着了，翠翠同黄狗也睡着了。	Before anyone noticed, Grandpa fell asleep.  So did Cuicui and the yellow dog.
第七章	CHAPTER SEVEN
到了端午。	It was the day of the festival.
祖父同翠翠在三天前业已预先约好，祖父守船，翠翠同黄狗过顺顺吊脚楼去看热闹。	Grandpa and Cuicui had already decided three days before that he would tend the boat while Cuicui and the yellow dog would visit Shunshun's stilt house to enjoy the excitement.
翠翠先不答应，后来答应了。	Cuicui hadn't agreed at first, but later she came around.
但过了一天，翠翠又翻悔回来，以为要看两人去看，要守船两人守船。	Yet, a day later, Cuicui changed her mind again, insisting that they must both go to the races or stay with the ferryboat.
祖父明白那个意思，是翠翠玩心与爱心相战争的结果。	The ferryman understood; she was at war with herself, torn between her own desire for fun and her love of him.
为了祖父的牵绊，应当玩的也无法去玩，这不成！	But it wouldn't do at all if she missed the fun that was her due just because she was tethered to him!
祖父含笑说：「翠翠，你这是为什么？说定了的又翻悔，同茶峒人平素品德不相称。我们应当说一是一，不许三心二意。	Grandpa said, with a smile, "Cuicui, what's wrong? Going back on your word is not what one expects of a Chadong girl. We stick to our promises, we don't give in to second thoughts.
我记性并不坏到这样子，把你答应了我的即刻忘掉」祖父虽那么说，很显然的事，祖父对于翠翠的打算是同意的。但人太乖了，祖父有点愀然不乐了。	My memory's not so bad that I forget your promises to me as soon as you make them!" So he said, but Grandpa obviously was prone to see things however she saw them. Yet because he doted on her, her change of heart saddened him, too.
见祖父不再说话，翠翠就说：「我走了，谁陪你？」	Seeing her grandpa fall silent, Cuicui asked him, "If I go, who will stay with you?"
祖父说：「你走了，船陪我。」	"If you go," he said, "the boat will stay with me!"
翠翠把眉毛皱拢去苦笑着，「船陪你，嗨，嗨，船陪你。爷爷，你真是－－」	Cuicui knitted her brows and gave him a wry smile: "Oh, so the boat will look after you. Is that right?"
祖父心想：「你总有一天会要走的。」	Grandpa thought to himself, "You will leave me, one day."
但不敢提这件事。祖父一时无话可说，于是走过屋后塔下小圃里去看葱，翠翠跟过去。	But he didn't dare bring that up. Grandpa didn't know what to say next, so he went out back of the house to the garden beneath the pagoda and checked on the scallions. Cuicui followed.
「爷爷，我决定不去，要去让船去，我替船陪你」	"Grandfather, I've made my decision. I'm not going. If someone has to go, let it be the boat. I'll take its place and keep you company!"
「好，翠翠，你不去我去，我还得戴了朵红花，装刘老老进城去见世面」	"Cuicui, if you won't go then I will, with red flowers in my hair, made up like an old country lady going to town on her first trip!"
两人都为这句话笑了许久。	The two of them laughed at this for the longest time. They left the dispute open to settlement.
祖父理葱，翠翠却摘了一根大葱呜呜吹着。	While Grandpa tended his scallions, Cuicui plucked a scallion with a big stem to use as a whistle.
有人在东岸喊过渡，翠翠不让祖父占先，便忙着跑下去，跳上了渡船，援着横溪缆子拉船过溪去接人。	People on the east bank called out to be ferried across.  Cuicui hurried over, blocking her grandpa's way.  She jumped into the boat and tugged it along the cable to the other side where the passengers were.
一面拉船一面喊祖父：	She yelled out to her grandpa:
「爷爷，你唱，你唱」	"Sing for us, Grandfather, sing!"
祖父不唱，却只站在高岩上望翠翠，把手摇着，一句话不说。	But he didn't. He just stood on the high crag, watching Cuicui and waving at her silently.
祖父有点心事。心事重重的，翠翠长大了。	Grandpa was a little worried.
翠翠一天比一天大了，无意中提到什么时会红脸了。	Cuicui was growing up, given to blushing now when certain things inadvertently came up in conversation.
时间在成长她，似乎正催促她，使她在另外一件事情上负点儿责。	The passage of time was ripening her, as if urging her forward, making her pay attention to new things.
她欢喜看扑粉满脸的新嫁娘，欢喜说到关于新嫁娘的故事，欢喜把野花戴到头上去，还欢喜听人唱歌。	She loved now to look at brides with their powder and makeup, to adorn her own hair with wildflowers, and to listen to songs.
茶峒人的歌声，缠绵处她已领略得出。	She was beginning to understand some of the sentiments in the local Chadong love songs.
她有时彷佛孤独了一点，爱坐在岩石上去，向天空一起云一颗星凝眸。	She seemed a little distant sometimes; she liked to sit on the rocky bluffs, fixing her gaze on a patch of clouds or a star in the sky.
祖父若问：「翠翠，想什么？」她便带着点儿害羞情绪，轻轻的说：「在看水鸭子打架」照当地习惯意思就是「翠翠不想什么」。但在心里却同时又自问：「翠翠，你真在想什么？」同是自己也在心里答着：「我想的很远，很多。可是我不知想些什么。」	Grandpa would ask, "Cuicui, what are you thinking about?" And she would whisper, embarrassed, "Cuicui's not thinking about anything." But at the same time she was asking herself, "Cuicui, what are you thinking about?" And she'd answer, "I'm thinking about lots of things, things that carry me far away. But I don't know what they are."
她的确在想，又的确连自己也不知在想些什么。这女孩子身体既发育得很完全，在本身上因年龄自然而来的一件「奇事」，到月就来，也使她多了些思索，多了些梦。	She was indeed wrapped up in thought, in thought that even she could not identify. Her girl's body had now completely filled out, and she had reached the age when she experienced a miracle of nature each month. This set her to thinking all the more.
祖父明白这类事情对于一个女子的影响，祖父心情也变了些。	Grandpa understood the impact of such things on a girl, and this in turn affected him.
祖父是一个在自然里活了七十年的人，但在人事上的自然现象，就有了些不能安排外。	He had lived his full seventy years amid nature, but some natural happenings in human life were beyond his control.
因为翠翠的长成，使祖父记起了些旧事，从掩埋在一大堆时间里的故事中，重新找回了些东西。	Cuicui's maturation made her grandpa recall events in the past.  From stories buried in the accumulations of time, certain things came back to haunt him.
翠翠的母亲，某一时节原同翠翠一个样子。眉毛长，眼睛大，皮肤红红的。	Cuicui's mother had once been just like her: long eyebrows, big eyes, rosy complexion, and a winsome charm that made you adore her.
也乖得使人怜爱－－也懂在一些小处，起眼动眉毛，使家中长辈快乐。	She was a clever one, knowing just how to roll her eyes and arch her eyebrows to the delight of family elders.
也彷佛永远不会同家中这一个分开。	One would have thought she, too, was incapable of leaving the old man.
但一点不幸来了，她认识了那个兵。	But then misfortune came: she met the soldier.
到末了丢开老的和小的，却陪那个兵死了。	In the end, she abandoned her elder and her young one to die with that soldier.
这些事从老船夫说来谁也无罪过，只应「天」去负责。	The old ferryman did not blame anyone for these things; he chalked it all up to Heaven.
翠翠的祖父口中不怨天，心却不能完全同意这种不幸的安排。	Cuicui's grandpa never cursed Heaven, but in his heart he could never completely accept its cruel disposition of things.
摊派到本身的一份，说来实在不公平！	He was still young at heart.
说是放下了，也正是不能放下的莫可奈何容忍到的一件事！	He said he had put it aside, yet it was something that couldn't be put aside, even though he must.
那时还有个翠翠。	And then there was Cuicui.
如今假若翠翠又同妈妈一样，老船夫的年龄，还能把小雏儿再育下去吗？	If Cuicui did as her mother did, could a man of his age bring up another baby?
人愿意神却不同意！	The gods would not necessarily consent, even if he were willing!
人太老了，应当休息了，凡是一个良善的乡下人，所应得到的劳苦与不幸，全得到了。	He was too old, ready for his rest.  All the toil and hardship that accompanied the life of a good and honest Chinese country fellow, he had already experienced.
假若另外高处有一个上帝，这上帝且有一双手支配一切，很明显的事，十分公道的办法，是应把祖父先收回去，再来让那个年青的在新的生活上得到应分接受那幸或不幸，才合道理。	If there really was a God up on high, and this God had two hands that could dispose of everything with perfect justice, He ought to take Grandpa first, letting the young people enjoy all that was due them in their new lives.
可是祖父并不那么想。	But Grandpa didn't think this way.
他为翠翠担心。	He was concerned about Cuicui.
他有时便躺到门外岩石上，对着星子想他的心事。	Sometimes he lay down on the bluffs under the stars to mull things over.
他以为死是应当快到了的，正因为翠翠人已长大了，证明自己也真正老了。	He felt that death would be coming for him soon.  The fact that Cuicui had grown up proved how old he was.
无论如何，得让翠翠有个着落。	Yet, whatever happened, he must get Cuicui settled.
翠翠既是她那可怜母亲交把他的，翠翠大了，他也得把翠翠交给一个人，他的事才算完结！	Cuicui's poor mother had given her to him.  Now that she had grown up, he must pass her on to someone else before his work on earth was done!
交给谁？	But who was the proper husband for her?
必需什么样的人方不委屈她？	Who could he be sure would never hurt her?
前几天顺顺家天保大老过溪时，同祖父谈话，这心直口快的青年人，第一句话就说：	A few days before, when the frank and outspoken Tianbao, Shunshun's No. 1, had crossed the stream and talked to Grandpa, the first words out of his mouth were:
「老伯伯，你翠翠长得真标致，像个观音样子。再过两年，若我有闲空能留在茶峒照料事情，不必像老鸦到处飞，我一定每夜到这溪边来为翠翠唱歌。」	"Elder Uncle, your Cuicui has grown quite beautiful. She's a real Guan Yin. Two years from now, if I can take charge of business in Chadong instead of having to fly over the landscape all day like a crow, I'll be coming by this stream every night to sing to Cuicui of my love."
祖父用微笑奖励这种自白。	Grandpa smiled to encourage him to go on with this declaration.
一面把船拉动，一面把那双小眼睛瞅着大老。	He looked at No. 1 with narrowed eyes while tugging the boat, as if to say, "I catch the meaning of your foolish confession, and it doesn't anger me. Go on  what else have you to say?"
于是大老又说：	Whereupon No. 1 continued:
「翠翠太娇了，我担心她只宜于听点茶峒人的歌声，不能作茶峒女子做媳妇的一切正经事。	"Cuicui is so delicate, I worry that she may be suited to listening to our Chadong love songs but not the humdrum errands of an ordinary Chadong wife.
我要个能听我唱歌的情人，却更不能缺少个照料家务的媳妇。	I want a sweetheart who can listen to my songs but she also has to be a wife who can manage household affairs.
『又要马儿不吃草，又要马儿走得好，』唉，这两句话恰是古人为我说的」	'I want a horse I don't have to feed, but I want it to run fast, too!'  The ancestors must have thought up that saying just for me, to show that you have to feed a horse to make it run fast!"
祖父慢条斯理把船掉了头，让船尾傍岸，就说：	Grandpa unhurriedly turned the boat around, putting the stern in to shore, and said:
「大老，也有这种事儿！你瞧着吧。」究竟是什么事，祖父可并不明白说下去。那青年走去后，祖父温习着那些出于一个男子口中的真话，实在又愁又喜。翠翠若应当交把一个人，这个人是不是适宜于照料翠翠？	"No. 1, anything can happen! Wait and see." After the young man left, Grandpa mulled over the boy's frank words. He was happy and at the same time worried.  Cuicui had to be entrusted to a husband.  Was this the best one to take care of her?
当真交把了他，翠翠是不是愿意？	And if he did bequeath her to him, would Cuicui be willing?
第八章	CHAPTER EIGHT
初五大清早落了点毛毛雨，上游且涨了点「龙船水」，河水全变作豆绿色。	A fine rain was falling at daybreak on the fifth of the month.
祖父上城买办过节的东西，戴了个粽粑叶「斗篷」，携带了一个篮子，一个装酒的大葫芦，肩头上挂了个褡裢，其中放了一吊六百钱，就走了。	Rising water levels upstream had provided the seasonal "Dragon Boat tide" and the river was already pea-green. Grandpa was on his way to town to buy goods for the festival, with a coolie hat made of phrynium fiber on his head and a bag containing a string of six hundred old imperial copper coins slung across his shoulder.  He carried a basket and a big gourd full of wine.
因为是节日，这一天从小村小寨带了铜钱担了货物上城去办货掉货的极多，这些人起身也极早，故祖父走后，黄狗就伴同翠翠守船。	Because it was a festival day, folk from all the little villages and Miao stockades had come bearing goods and money for buying, selling, and trading.  They had all arisen very early too, so Cuicui and the yellow dog tended the ferryboat in Grandpa's absence.
翠翠头上戴了一个崭新的斗篷，把过渡人一趟一趟的送来送去。	Cuicui wore a brand-new coolie hat as she ferried passengers back and forth, one trip after another.
黄狗坐在船头，每当船拢岸时必先跳上岸边去衔绳头，引起每个过渡人的兴味。	To the amusement of all, the yellow dog sat in the bow and, when they landed, jumped ashore before everyone else, carrying the tie rope in his mouth.
有些过渡乡下人也携了狗上城，照例如俗话说的，「狗离不得屋」，一离了自己的家，即或傍着主人，也变得非常老实了。	Some country folk brought their own dogs with them to town, but as the old saying goes, "dogs ought to be kept at home." Away from their territory, even accompanied by their masters, these dogs had to be on their best behavior.
到过渡时，翠翠的狗必走过去嗅嗅，从翠翠方面讨取了一个眼色，似乎明白翠翠的意思，就不敢有什么举动。	On the ferry, Cuicui's dog would go up and sniff at them until Cuicui threw him a cross look; he seemed to understand that she was telling him to stand back.
直到上岸后，把拉绳子的事情作完，眼见到那只陌生的狗上小山去了，也必跟着追去。	Even after landing, when he'd done his duty with the rope, he had to follow the unfamiliar dogs all the way up the hill.
或者向狗主人轻轻吠着，或者逐着那陌生的狗，必得翠翠带点儿嗔恼的嚷着：「狗，狗，你狂什么？还有事情做，你就跑呀！」于是这黄狗赶快跑回船上来，且依然满船闻嗅不已。翠翠说：「这算什么轻狂举动！跟谁学得的！还不好好蹲到那边去！」狗俨然极其懂事，便即刻到它自己原来地方去，只间或又像想起什么似的，轻轻的吠几声。	Whether he was barking softly at a dog's master or following the dog, Cuicui would yell at him, with a little anger in her voice: "Hey, there, dog! What's gotten into you? What makes you run off when we have work to do?" The yellow dog would quickly run back to the boat and go back to sniffing every place in sight. Cuicui said, "What nonsense is this? Where'd you learn that? Lie down over there!" As if he understood her words, the dog immediately went to his place in the boat and only occasionally gave a few soft yaps, as if he'd just remembered something.
雨落个不止，溪面一起烟。	The rain would not let up.  The river was covered with mist.
翠翠在船上无事可作时，便算着老船夫的行程。	When work quieted down on the boat, Cuicui rehearsed the old ferryman's itinerary in her imagination.
她知道他这一去应到什么地方碰到什么人，谈些什么话，这一天城门边应当是些什么情形，河街上应当是些什么情形，「心中一本册」，她完全如同眼见到的那么明明白白。她又知道祖父的脾气，一见城中相熟粮子上人物，不管是马夫火夫，总会把过节时应有的颂祝说出。	She knew just where he was going, whom he would run into and what they would say to each other, what would be going on at the city gate and on River Street  it was all in "the ledger of her mind," as clear as if she had seen it with her own eyes. And she knew her grandpa backward and forward. Every time he met an army friend from the city, even a horse groomer or a cook boy, he would give him the proper greetings of the day.
这边说，「副爷，你过节吃饱喝饱！」那一个便也将说，「划船的，你吃饱喝饱！」这边若说着如上的话，那边人说，「有什么可以吃饱喝饱？四两肉，两碗酒，既不会饱也不会醉！」那么，祖父必很诚实邀请这熟人过碧溪岨喝个够量。	He'd say, "Honorable Soldier, may you have your fill of good food and drink this holiday!" And the other would say, "Oarsman, may you have the same!" But if the reply to this salute was "What good food and drink do you mean? Four ounces of pork and two bowls of wine are not enough to satisfy anyone or get them drunk!," Grandpa would earnestly invite his friend to Green Creek Hill to drink up. If the man wanted to drink a swig of wine from Grandpa's gourd, the ferryman would not be tightfisted  he'd hand it right over.
倘若有人当时就想喝一口祖父葫芦中的酒，这老船夫也从不吝啬，必很快的就把葫芦递过去。酒喝过了，那兵营中人卷舌子舔着嘴唇，称赞酒好，于是又必被勒迫着喝第二口。	And if the man from the garrison rolled his tongue and licked his lips while praising the wine's quality, Grandpa would press him to take another swallow.
酒在这种情形下少起来了，就又跑到原来铺上去，加满为止。	Thus was the wine dissipated, until the ferryman ran back to the shop where he'd bought it to fill his gourd up to the top again.
翠翠且知道祖父还会到码头上去同刚拢岸一天两天的上水船水手谈谈话，问问下河的米价盐价，有时且弯着腰钻进那带有海带鱿鱼味，以及其他油味、醋味、柴烟味的船舱里去，水手们从小坛中抓出一把红枣，递给老船夫，过一阵，等到祖父回家被翠翠埋怨时，这红枣便成为祖父与翠翠和解的东西。	Cuicui knew, too, that Grandpa would go to the docks to talk to sailors whose boats had put in a day or two earlier.  He'd ask them the price of rice and salt downriver, and sometimes he'd stoop over and crawl into their cabins, which were steeped in the smells of squid and fish, sundry oils, vinegar, and smoke from the burning of wood.  The boatmen would grab a handful of red dates from a little jar and press them on the old ferryman. When Grandpa got home and heard Cuicui's complaints about his absence, these dates became the instruments of their reconciliation.
祖父一到河街上，且一定有许多铺子上商人送他粽子与其他东西，作为对这个忠于职守的划船人一点敬意，祖父虽嚷着「我带了那么一大堆，回去会把老骨头压断」，可是不管如何，这些东西多少总得领点情。	And when Grandpa got to River Street, many a shop owner would give him zongzi and other treats out of respect for this oarsman who was so true to his duty.  Though Grandpa would shout, "It'll crush my old bones to bring back a pile this big," he always had to give in to their gestures of gratitude.
走到卖肉案桌边去，他想「买肉」人家却不愿接钱，屠户若不接钱，他却宁可到另外一家去，决不想沾那点便宜。	He'd go to the long table where meat was sold and ask to buy, but they wouldn't take his money. If one butcher would refuse payment, he'd have to go to another rather than take advantage of others' goodwill.
那屠户说，「爷爷，你为人那么硬算什么？又不是要你去做犁口耕田！」但不行，他以为这是血钱，不比别的事情，你不收钱他会把钱预先算好，猛的把钱掷到大而长的钱筒里去，攫了肉就走去的。	The butcher would say, "Elder, why are you so unyielding about this? Nobody's asking you to be a beast of burden in front of the plow!" But he wouldn't take the offering. To him, this was akin to blood money, in a class of its own. If his money wasn't accepted, he'd figure out the meat's cost, thrust the coins into the bamboo tube that was the merchant's money box, seize the purchase, and leave.
卖肉的明白他那种性情，到他称肉时总选取最好的一处，且把份量故意加多，他见及时却将说：「喂喂，大老板，我不要你那些好处！腿上的肉是城里人炒鱿鱼肉丝用的肉，莫同我开玩笑！我要夹项肉，我要浓的糯的，我是个划船人，我要拿去炖葫萝卜喝酒的！」	The butcher, knowing how he would react beforehand, would give Grandpa the choicest portion and make sure it was overweight. But the ferryman might notice that and say, "Hey there, boss, I don't want any favors! Tenderloin cuts are for city people to saut   with squid. Don't make me laugh! I want meat from the neck, rich and sticky.  I row a boat. I want to make a stew of it with carrots while I drink my wine!"
得了肉，把钱交过手时，自己先数一次，又嘱咐屠户再数，屠户却照例不理会他，把一手钱哗的向长竹筒口丢去，他于是简直是妩媚的微笑着走了。	Meat in hand, he'd count out his payment before handing it over, then insist that the butcher count it again, but the latter would ignore this and throw the coins carelessly into his money tube.  The ferryman, as he left, would give a smile that had to be called ingratiating.
屠户与其他买肉人，见到他这种神气，必笑个不止－－	The butcher and his other customers found this hilarious.
翠翠还知道祖父必到河街上顺顺家里去。	Cuicui knew, too, that Grandpa would go to Shunshun's house on River Street.
翠翠温习着两次过节两个日子所见所闻的一切，心中很快乐，好像目前有一个东西，同早间在床上闭了眼睛所看到那种捉摸不定的黄葵花一样，这东西彷佛很明朗的在眼前，却看不准，抓不住。	She mused about everything she had seen and heard on the festival days of the past two years, joyful at heart, as if something had come to her, like the elusive yellow sunflower she saw with her eyes closed as she lay in bed in the morning. This thing loomed bright and bold before her, but she couldn't see it clearly or quite grasp it.
翠翠想：「白鸡关真出老虎吗？」她不知道为什么忽然想起白鸡关。白鸡关是酉水中部一个地名，离茶峒两百多里路！	Cuicui wondered: "Are there really tigers at White Rooster Pass?" She had no idea why she suddenly remembered White Rooster Pass. It was located in the middle reaches of the You River, over seventy miles from Chadong!
于是又想：「三十二个人摇六匹橹，上水走风时张起个大篷，一百幅白布铺成的一片东西，先在这样大船上过洞庭湖，多可笑－－」她不明白洞庭湖有多大，也就从没见过这种大船，更可笑的，还是她自己也不知道为什么却想到这个问题！	And then she thought: "Thirty-two men hefting six heavy oars, hoisting a great sail when the wind comes up, made from one hundred lengths of white cloth, crossing Lake Dongting in such a giant boat  how absurd!" She had no idea how big Lake Dongting was, nor had she ever seen such a big boat. Even funnier, she couldn't herself imagine why these thoughts had come to her.
一群过渡人来了，有担子，有送公事跑差模样的人物，另外还有母女二人。	A group arrived to be ferried across, people with goods: men who looked like government messengers and a mother and daughter.
母亲穿了新浆洗得硬朗的蓝布衣服，女孩子脸上涂着两饼红色，穿了不甚合身的新衣，上城到亲戚家中去拜节看龙船的。	The mother wore a blue outfit that had been starched stiff as a board and the girl's cheeks were rouged like two round cakes.  She wore new clothes that didn't fit too well.  They were going to town to greet their relatives at the festival and see the dragon boats.
等待众人上船稳定后，翠翠一面望着那小女孩，一面把船拉过溪去。	After waiting for the group to get settled on the boat, Cuicui gave the girl a once-over while she pulled the boat across the stream.
那小孩从翠翠估来年纪也将十三四岁了，神气却很娇，似乎从不曾离开过母亲。	To Cuicui, the girl looked to be about eleven and already very spoiled, always hanging on to her mother.
脚下穿的是一双尖头新油过的钉鞋，上面沾污了些黄泥。	Her newly polished shoes had pointy toes and spikes on the bottom, but they were splashed with mud.
裤子是那种泛紫的葱绿布做的。	Her trousers were made of leek-green cotton cloth with specks of purple.
见翠翠尽是望她，她也便看着翠翠，眼睛光光的如同两粒水晶球。	When she saw Cuicui staring at her, she stared back with eyes bright as crystal balls.
有点害羞，有点不自在，同时也有点不可言说的爱娇。	She looked a little embarrassed, ill at ease, and at the same time indefinably seductive.
那母亲模样的妇人便问翠翠年纪有几岁。	The mother then asked Cuicui how old she was.
翠翠笑着，不高兴答应，却反问小女孩今年几岁。	Cuicui smiled, unwilling to answer, and instead asked how old her daughter was.
听那母亲说十三岁时，翠翠忍不住笑了。	When she said twelve years old, Cuicui couldn't suppress a laugh.
那母女显然是财主人家的妻女，从神气上就可看出的。	They were obviously the wife and daughter of a rich man; one could tell from their manner.
翠翠注视那女孩，发现了女孩子手上还戴得有一副麻花绞的银手镯，闪着白白的亮光，心中有点儿歆羡。	Cuicui spotted a pair of bracelets on the girl, made of interlaced strands of silver.  They flashed a shiny white light and made Cuicui feel a little envious.
船傍岸后，人陆续上了岸，妇人从身上摸出一铜子，塞到翠翠手中，就走了。	When the boat reached shore and everyone was off, the woman took out a copper coin and pressed it into Cuicui's hand before going.
翠翠当时竟忘了祖父的规矩了，也不说道谢，也不把钱退还，只望着这一行人中那个女孩子身后发痴。	Forgetting her grandpa's rule for the moment, Cuicui neither thanked her nor gave it back.  She just gaped from behind at the girl among the file of people.
一行人正将翻过小山时，翠翠忽又忙匆匆的追上去，在山头上把钱还给那妇人。	The group was about to go up the hill when Cuicui suddenly chased after them.
那妇人说：「这是送你的！」翠翠不说什么，只微笑把头尽摇，且不等妇人来得及说第二句话，就很快的向自己渡船边跑去了。	At the top of the hill, she returned the money to the woman, who said, "It's for you!" Cuicui just smiled and shook her head without replying, to indicate that she couldn't accept it, and without waiting for the woman to say another word, she quickly ran back to her ferryboat.
到了渡船上，溪那边又有人喊过渡，翠翠把船又拉回去。	When she reached the boat, people on the opposite shore were summoning the ferry, so Cuicui tugged the boat across.
第二次过渡是七个人，又有两个女孩子，也同样因为看龙船特意换了干净衣服，相貌却并不如何美观，因此使翠翠更不能忘记先前那一个。	Seven people crossed on this trip, among them two more girls, who also wore clean outfits to go see the boat races.  But they were not so attractive; this made Cuicui fix her mind all the more on the previous girl.
今天过渡的人特别多，其中女孩子比平时更多，翠翠既在船上拉缆子摆渡，故见到什么好看的，极古怪的，人乖的，眼睛眶子红红的，莫不在记忆中留下个印象。	More people than usual needed ferrying today, especially girls.  Cuicui pulled them across on the boat, so they made a deep impression on her: the pretty ones, the funny-looking ones, the nice ones, ones with reddened eyes.
无人过渡时，等着祖父祖父又不来，便尽只反复温习这些女孩子的神气。且轻轻的无所谓的唱着：	When the crowds stopped, while she waited for Grandpa and Grandpa didn't come, she reviewed all of the girls in her mind and sang softly and distractedly:
「白鸡关出老虎咬人，不咬别人，团总的小姐派第一。	The tiger at White Rooster Pass feasts on people And he' ll get the militia captain's daughter first.
－－大姐戴副金簪子，二姐戴副银钏子，只有我三妹没得什么戴，耳朵上长年戴条豆芽菜。」	Sister No. 1 wears a pair of gold hairpins, Sister No. 2, a pair of silver bracelets, But Sister No. 3, little me, has no jewelry to be found; Just bean-sprout earrings, worn all the year round.
城中有人下乡的，在河街上一个酒店前面，曾见及那个撑渡船的老头子，把葫芦嘴推让给一个年青水手，请水手喝他新买的白烧酒，翠翠问及时，那城中人就告给她所见到的事情。	A man came from town who'd seen the old ferryman in front of a tavern on River Street, offering a young boatman his gourd full of freshly bought white liquor.  Cuicui inquired further and he told all.
翠翠笑祖父的慷慨不是时候，不是地方。	She laughed to hear of her grandpa's generosity, offered at just the wrong time and the wrong place.
过渡人走了，翠翠就在船上又轻轻的哼着巫师十二月里为人还愿迎神的歌玩－－	As the man departed, Cuicui again began to softly hum, just for fun, the chant that the local shaman used to summon the gods:
你大仙，你大神，睁眼看看我们这里人！	Gods and immortals, open your eyes and look at us down here!
他们既诚实，又年青，又身无疾病。	Our young are honest and healthy.
他们大人会喝酒，会作事，会睡觉；他们孩子能长大，能耐饥，能耐冷；他们牯牛肯耕田，山羊肯生仔，鸡鸭肯孵卵；他们女人会养儿子，会唱歌，会找她心中欢喜的情人！	Our elders know how to drink, and work, and sleep; Our children grow up to withstand hunger and cold; Our oxen are willing to plow, our sheep to birth, our fowl to hatch eggs; Our women are good at raising children, singing, and finding their true loves!
你大神，你大仙，排驾前来站两边。	Gods and immortals, come on down and have a look.
关夫子身跨赤兔马，尉迟公手拿大铁鞭！	Lord Guan, mount the Red-haired Steed, General Weichi Gong, brandish the iron whip.
你大仙，你大神，云端下降慢慢行！	Gods and immortals above, ride down on the clouds and look around!
张果老驴得坐稳，铁拐李脚下要小心！	Old Man Zhang Guo, ride steady on your donkey, Iron Crutch Li, be careful where you step!
福禄绵绵是神恩，和风和雨神好心，好酒好饭当前阵，肥猪肥羊火上烹！	Riches and emoluments without end come from the gods; Timely winds and rains, too, come from your favor, So good wine and food are laid before you, Fat pigs and sheep are frying in the pan.
洪秀全，李鸿章，你们在生是霸王，杀人放火尽节全忠各有道，今来坐席又何妨！	Hong Xiuquan, Li Hongzhang, Once you were lords of all around, Murder and arson  suicide and loyalty  each has its art, So join the feast, it's for you to take part.
慢慢吃，慢慢喝，月白风清好过河。	Eat and drink, please take your time, Moon's up and breeze's down; fording the river will be just fine.
醉时携手同归去，我当为你再唱歌！	If you're drunk I'll take your hand and lead you along, So I can treat you to another song.
那首歌声音既极柔和，快乐中又微带忧郁。	The melody was very sweet, full of happiness tinged with melancholy.
唱完了这歌，翠翠觉得心上有一丝儿凄凉。	When she finished singing it, Cuicui felt a little despondent.
她想起秋末酬神还愿时田其中的火燎同鼓角。	She recalled the prairie fires and drumbeats at the end of autumn when it was time for rewarding the gods and redeeming promises to them.
远处鼓声已起来了，她知道绘有朱红长线的龙船这时节已下河了，细雨还依然落个不止，溪面一起烟。	The drumbeats from afar had already begun to sound. She knew that this must mark the dragon boats, painted with their vermilion stripes, going into the river. It was still drizzling endlessly and a layer of mist hung over the creek.
第九章	CHAPTER NINE
祖父回家时，大约已将近平常吃早饭时节了，肩上手上全是东西，一上小山头便喊翠翠，要翠翠拉船过小溪来迎接他。	When Grandpa got home, it was almost time for breakfast.  Arms and shoulder poles laden with packages, he called out for Cuicui from the top of the hill for her to pull the boat across the stream to meet him.
翠翠眼看到多少人皆进了城，正在船上急得莫可奈何，听到祖父的声音，精神旺了，锐声答着：「爷爷，爷爷，我来了」老船夫从码头边上了渡船后，把肩上手上的东西搁到船头上，一面帮着翠翠拉船，一面向翠翠笑着，如同一个小孩子，神气充满了谦虚与羞怯。	Having seen so many people getting to go to town, Cuicui there in the boat was beside herself with impatience, but the sound of her grandpa picked up her spirits.  She hollered back, shrilly, "Grandfather, Grandfather, I'm coming!" When the old ferryman had got into the boat and set down his load in the prow, he helped tug the boat as he smiled at Cuicui, himself as meek and bashful as a child.
「翠翠，你急坏了，是不是？」翠翠本应埋怨祖父的，但她却回答说：「爷爷，我知道你在河街上劝人喝酒，好玩得很。」翠翠还知道祖父极高兴到河街上去玩，但如此说来，将更使祖父害羞乱嚷了，因此话到口边却不提出。	"Cuicui, I'll bet you thought I was never coming, didn't you?" She was going to complain to her grandpa, but instead she answered, "Grandfather, I knew you were on River Street, plying people with wine, having a wonderful time." Cuicui knew how much her grandpa loved to hang around on River Street, but to go on about it would have made her grandpa sputter embarrassed denials, so she kept it back.
翠翠把搁在船头的东西一一估记在眼里，不见了酒葫芦。	Counting up all the bundles in the prow, Cuicui noticed that the wine gourd was missing.
翠翠嗤的笑了。	She snickered.
「爷爷，你倒大方，请副爷同船上人吃酒，连葫芦也吃到肚里去了」	"Grandfather, you're so generous, letting all those soldiers and boatmen drink off you, you even let them swallow your gourd!"
祖父笑着忙作说明：	Smiling, Grandpa quickly put in:
「哪里，哪里，我那葫芦被顺顺大伯扣下了，他见我在河街上请人喝酒，就说：『喂，喂，摆渡的张横，这不成的。	"No way, no way. Elder Brother Shunshun took it away from me. He saw me out on River Street inviting people to have a drink and said, 'Hey there, Captain Zhang Heng of the ferrymen, we can't have this.
你不开槽坊，如何这样子！	You don't own a distillery!  How can you go on like this?
把你那个放下来，请我全喝了吧。	If you have to be a philanthropist, a real sport like the heroes of Mount Liang, then give it over, I'll drink it up for you!'
』他当真那么说，『请我全喝了吧。	That's what he said, 'I'll drink it up for you!'
』我把葫芦放下了。	I put down my wine gourd.
但我猜想他是同我闹着玩的。	But I figure he was kidding me.
他家里还少烧酒吗？	Is there any lack of wine in his household?
翠翠，你说，－－」	What do you think, Cuicui?"
「爷爷，你以为人家真想喝你的酒，便是同你开玩笑吗？」	"Grandfather, do you really think it was about him having a drink, even if it was all in jest?"
「那是怎么的？」	"What, then?"
「你放心，人家一定因为你请客不是地方，所以扣下你的葫芦，不让你请人把酒喝完。等等就会为你送来的，你还不明白，真是！－－」	"Nothing to be upset over, he must have confiscated your gourd because you picked the wrong place to be serving all comers; he didn't want you to end up with no liquor at all. He'll send it back with one of his men in a little while.  You still don't get it! For Heaven's sake!"
「唉，当真会是这样的」	"Do you really think he will?"
说着船已拢了岸，翠翠抢先帮祖父搬东西，但结果却只拿了那尾鱼，那个花褡裢；褡裢中钱已用光了，却有一包白糖，一包小芝麻饼子。	By this time the boat had reached the shore.  Cuicui hurried to help her grandpa gather up his bundles before he could pick them up, but all she got was a lone fish and the embroidered waist pouch.  The money was already gone; in its place were a packet of white sugar and a box of sesame cakes.
两人刚把新买的东西搬运到家中，对溪就有人喊过渡，祖父要翠翠看着肉菜免得被野猫拖去，争着下溪去做事，一会儿，便同那个过渡人嚷着到家中来了。	The two had just brought the new purchases into the house when someone hailed them for service from the other side of the stream.  Asking Cuicui to keep an eye on the meat and vegetables lest a feral cat get them, Grandpa rushed ahead of her to the ferry.  After a short time, he headed back home with the passenger, speaking loudly and excitedly.
原来这人便是送酒葫芦的。只听到祖父说：「翠翠，你猜对了。人家当真把酒葫芦送来了」	The visitor had indeed come to return the gourd. Grandpa said, "Cuicui, you guessed right! He really did bring it back!"
翠翠来不及向灶边走去，祖父同一个年纪青青的脸黑肩膊宽的人物，便进到屋里了。	Before Cuicui could escape into the kitchen, Grandpa entered the house with a young man. He was dark and broad-shouldered.
翠翠同客人皆笑着，让祖父把话说下去。	Cuicui and the visitor smiled at each other, letting Grandpa talk on.
客人又望着翠翠笑，翠翠彷佛明白为么被人望着，有点不好意思起来，走到灶边烧火去了。	The guest kept on looking and smiling at Cuicui, who seemed to realize what the staring meant.  She began to grow a little embarrassed, so she went into the kitchen to light the fire in the stove.
溪边又有人喊过渡，翠翠赶忙跑出门外船上去，把人渡过了溪。	When yet another person came to the stream and hailed the ferry, she ran out the door to the boat and took him across.
恰好又有人过溪。	And just then there was another passenger.
天虽落小雨，过渡人却分外多，一连三次。	Though it was drizzling, there were far more people to serve than usual, requiring three trips.
翠翠在船上一面作事一面想起祖父的趣处。	Once on board, as Cuicui tended the boat, she began thinking about her granddad's happy mood.
不知怎么的，从城里被人打发来送酒葫芦的，她觉得好像是个熟人。	She sensed, somehow, that she knew this city fellow who'd been dispatched to return the wine gourd.
可是眼睛里像是熟人，却不明白在什么地方见过面。	But though he looked familiar, she didn't know where she'd seen him before.
但也正像是不肯把这人想到某方面去，方猜不着这来人的身分。	She seemed unwilling to figure it all out and could not guess his identity.
祖父在岩坎上边喊：「翠翠，翠翠，你上来歇歇，陪陪客」本来无人过渡便想上岸去烧火，但经祖父一喊，反而不上岸了。	Grandpa hollered from the bluff: "Cuicui! Cuicui! Come up and sit awhile, keep our guest company!" She'd intended to go ashore and light the stove since no one needed ferrying, but now that her grandpa had called her, she didn't.
来客问祖父「进不进城看船」，老渡船夫就说「应当看守渡船」。两人又谈了些别的话。到后来客方言归正传：	The visitor asked Grandpa, "Are you going to town to see the boats?" "I have to stay with my boat," replied the old ferryman. The two continued talking about other things. Finally, the visitor came to the point:
「伯伯，你翠翠像个大人了，长得很好看」	"Uncle, your Cuicui is grown up now. She's very pretty!"
撑渡船的笑了。「口气同哥哥一样，倒爽快呢。」这样想着，却那么说：「二老，这地方配受人称赞的只有你，人家都说你好看：八面山的豹子，地地溪的锦鸡，』全是特为颂扬你这个人好处的警句」	The ferryman smiled. "He talks just like his elder brother  says exactly what's on his mind," he thought to himself. But he said, "No. 2, you're the only one in these parts who deserves that praise. Everybody says you're handsome! Folks have made up epithets to acclaim your virtues: the Leopard of Bamian Mountain, the Golden Pheasant of Didi Stream!"
「但是，这很不公平。」	"What nonsense!"
「很公平的！我听船上人说，你上次押船，船到三门下面白鸡关滩出了事，从急浪中你援救过三个人。你们在滩上过夜，被村子里女人见着了，人家在你棚子边唱歌一整夜，是不是真有其事？」	"They've really captured you! I heard some boatmen say that last time when you were piloting a boat and it wrecked up below the Three Gorges in the rapids at White Rooster Pass, you rescued three men from the dashing waves. They say you stayed overnight by the rapids, and when the village girls got a look at you, they crooned the night away with love songs outside your shack. Is it true?"
「不是女人唱歌一夜，是狼嗥。那地方著名多狼，只想得机会吃我们！	"That wasn't any serenading by young women, that was the howling of wolves! The place is famous for them, just looking for the chance to eat us!
我们烧了一大堆火，吓住了它们，才不被吃掉」	We kept a big campfire to scare them off  that's the only way we escaped with our lives!"
老船夫笑了，「那更妙！人家说的话还是很对的。狼是只吃姑娘，吃小孩，吃十八岁标致青年，像我这种老骨头，它不要吃的」	The old ferryman chuckled: "All the more! What they said about you was right! A wolf only picks out young maidens and children to eat  and handsome young seventeen-year-olds  never an old bones like me. It'd take one sniff at me and go away!"
那二老说：「伯伯，你到这里见过两万个日头，别人家全说我们这个地方风水好，出大人，不知为什么原因，如今还不出大人？」	At that, No. 2 said, "Uncle, you've seen a lot of sunrises in this locale. Everybody says the excellent feng shui here, the geomancy, is propitious for the emergence of great men. I wonder why we haven't had one so far?"
「你是不是说风水好应出有大名头的人？我以为这种人不生在我们这个小地方，也不碍事。	"You mean the good feng shui should have given us someone with a big name? I don't see anything so bad about not having such a person born in a little place like this.
我们有聪明，正直，勇敢，耐劳的年青人，就够了。	It's enough that we have young people who are bright, honest, brave, and able to work hard.
像你们父子兄弟，为本地也增光彩已经很多很多」	The men in your family, for instance, have brought this place a lot of glory!"
「伯伯，你说得好，我也是那么想。地方不出坏人出好人，如伯伯那么样子，人虽老了，还硬朗得同棵楠木树一样，稳稳当当的活到这块地面，又正经，又大方，难得的咧。」	"Uncle, you're right, I was just thinking that. This place of ours produces good men, not bad men  men like you, Uncle. You may be old, but you're still as strong as a nanmu tree, living a steady and stable life on this patch of earth  both decent and generous. There aren't many like you."
「我是老骨头了，还说什么。日头，雨水，走长路，挑份量沉重的担子，大吃大喝，挨饿受寒，自己分上的都拿过了，不久就会躺到这冰凉土地上喂蛆吃的。这世界有得是你们小伙子分上的一切，好好的干，日头不辜负你们，你们也莫辜负日头」	"I'm an old man, what am I worth? I've had everything that was my lot in life: sun and rain, long journeys bearing heavy loads, living it up on food and liquor, then suffering hunger and cold  and pretty soon, I'll be lying beneath the cold, cold earth, feeding the earthworms. There's plenty waiting on this earth for you young folk. If you do your work well, it won't let you down  just hold up your end of the bargain."
「伯伯，看你那么勤快，我们年青人不敢辜负日头」	"Uncle, with your diligence setting the example, we young people dare not let you down!"
说了一阵，二老想走了，老船夫便站到门口去喊叫翠翠，要她到屋里来烧水煮饭，掉换他自己看船。	They'd been talking for some time, so No. 2 was ready to go.  The old ferryman stood outside his doorway and called for Cuicui to come into the house to boil water and cook a meal while he took her place on the boat.
翠翠不肯上岸，客人却已下船了，翠翠把船拉动时，祖父故意装作埋怨神气说：	Cuicui didn't want to come ashore, but the guest had already boarded the boat, so as she tugged the boat, Grandpa pretended to scold her:
「翠翠，你不上来，难道要我在家里做媳妇煮饭吗？」	"Cuicui, aren't you coming back? Surely you don't expect me to be a housewife and do the cooking?"
翠翠斜睨了客人一眼，见客人正盯着她，便把脸背过去，抿着嘴儿，很自负的拉着那条横缆，船慢慢拉过对岸了。	Throwing a sidelong glance at the visitor, Cuicui saw that he was staring at her.  Turning her head away and pursing her lips, she smartly attended to her business pulling on the cable, until she'd slowly pulled the boat onto the shore.
客人站在船头同翠翠说话：	The visitor stood in the prow and said to Cuicui,
「翠翠，吃了饭，同你爷爷去看划船吧？」	"Cuicui, when you've eaten, won't you come with your grandfather to our stilt house and watch the boat race?"
翠翠不好意思不说话，便说：「爷爷说不去，去了无人守这个船」	At first too embarrassed to speak, Cuicui finally answered, "Grandfather says he's not going, because then there'd be no one to tend the ferry!"
「你呢？」	"Won't you come?"
「爷爷不去我也不去。」	"If Grandfather won't go, neither will I."
「你也守船吗？」	"Do you have to tend the boat, too?"
「我陪我爷爷。」	"I want to be with Grandfather."
「我要一个人来替你们守渡船，好不好？」	"What if I get someone to take your place on the boat?"
砰的一下船头已撞到岸边土坎上了，船拢岸了。	The boat reached the shore with a thud as it bumped into a mound of earth.
二老向岸上一跃，站在斜坡上说：	No. 2 jumped up on the bank and said, from the slope:
「翠翠，难为你！－－我回去就要人来替你们，你们快吃饭，一同到我家里去看船，今天人多咧，热闹咧」	"Cuicui, I've put you to trouble. When I get home, I'll send someone to take the place of both of you. Eat your meal and hurry on over to my house to see the boats.  A lot of people are there already, it's very lively!"
翠翠不明白这陌生人的好意，不懂得为什么一定要到他家中去看船，抿着小嘴笑笑，就把船拉回去了。	Misunderstanding the good intentions of this stranger, and why she had to go to his house to see the boats, Cuicui giggled between her little pursed lips and pulled the boat back to the other shore.
到了家中一边溪岸后，只见那个人还正在对溪小山上，好像等待什么，不即走开。	When she got to the bank where her home was, the young man had reached the top of the hill on the other side.  He was still there, as if waiting for something.
翠翠回转家中，到灶口边去烧火，一面把带点湿气的草塞进灶里去，一面向正在把客人带回的那一葫芦酒试着的祖父询问：	Cuicui went home and lit the fire.  She stuffed some damp grasses into the stove and inquired of her grandpa, who was just then testing out the wine in the gourd returned by the visitor.
「爷爷，那人说回去就要人来替你，要我们两人去看船，你去不去？」	"Grandfather, that fellow said he was going back to get someone to replace you, so the two of us can go see the races. Will you go?"
「你高兴去吗？」	"Would you like to?"
「两人同去我高兴。那个人很好，我像认得他，他是谁？」	"If we go together. I like that young man. He seems familiar. Who is he?"
祖父心想：「这倒对了，人家也觉得你好」祖父笑着说：	"Good, he likes you, too!" Grandpa thought to himself. He said, with a smile,
「翠翠，你不记得你前年在大河边时，有个人说要让大鱼咬你吗？」	"Cuicui, don't you remember two years ago, you were on the big riverbank and someone said you might be eaten by a big fish?"
翠翠明白了，却仍然装不明白问：「他是谁？」	Cuicui understood, but she pretended not to. She asked, "Who is he, then?"
「你想想看，猜猜看。」	"Think, Cuicui. Take a guess."
「一本《百家姓》好多人，我猜不着他是张三李四。」	"I couldn't possibly guess who he is."
「顺顺船总家的二老，他认识你你不认识他啊」他抿了一口酒，像赞美酒又像赞美人，低低的说：「好的，妙的，这是难得的。」	"He's No. 2 of Fleetmaster Shunshun's household. He remembered you, but you still don't remember him!" He took a sip of wine and said, in a low voice, as if to praise the wine and a certain man at the same time: "Good, just right. You're not this lucky very often!"
过渡的人在门外坎下叫唤着，老祖父口中还是「好的，妙的－－」匆匆下船做事去了。	People wanting the ferry hailed him from outside the door. The old grandpa reiterated, "Good, just right  " Then in a flash he was in the boat, getting down to work.
第十章	CHAPTER TEN
吃饭时隔溪有人喊过渡，翠翠抢着下船，到了那边，方知道原来过渡的人，便是船总顺顺家派来作替手的水手，一见翠翠就说道：「二老要你们一吃了饭就去，他已下河了。	While they were eating, someone called for the ferry on the far bank.  Cuicui rushed to the boat.  When she got to the other shore, she saw that her passenger was the boatman sent by Fleetmaster Shunshun to take their place.
」见了祖父又说：「二老要你们吃了饭就去，他已下河了。」	He looked at Cuicui and said, "No. 2 wants you to come over when you finish eating. He's already in his dragon boat." He said the same thing when he saw Grandpa.
张耳听听，便可听出远处鼓声已较密，从鼓声里使人想到那些极狭的船，在长潭中笔直前进时，水面上画着如何美丽的长长的线路！	Straining their ears, they could hear the faraway drumbeats picking up their pace, and from that they could picture the very slender boats dashing straight ahead across the Long Depths, their wakes leaving long and exquisitely beautiful lines in the water.
新来的人茶也不吃，便在船头站妥了，翠翠同祖父吃饭时，邀他喝一杯，只是摇头推辞。	Unwilling even to stop for tea, the newcomer took a position in the prow of the boat.  Cuicui and Grandpa had invited him in during their meal, but he shook his head.
祖父说：	Grandpa said,
「翠翠，我不去，你同小狗去好不好？」	"Cuicui, I'm not going, why don't you and the little dog go on without me?"
「要不去，我也不想去！」	"If you don't go, I don't want to, either!"
「我去呢？」	"And if I do?"
「我本来也不想去，但我愿意陪你去。」	"I didn't really want to, but I'd go with you."
祖父微笑着，「翠翠，翠翠，你陪我去，好的，你陪我去！」	Grandpa smiled: "All right, Cuicui, you come with me, keep me company!"
祖父同翠翠到城里大河边时河边早站满了人。	By the time Grandpa and Cuicui got to the big river in the city, the banks had been crowded with spectators for some time.
细雨已经停止，地面还是湿湿的。	The drizzle had stopped, but the ground was still wet.
祖父要翠翠过河街船总家吊脚楼上去看船，翠翠却以为站在河边较好。	Grandpa wanted Cuicui to go to the fleetmaster's stilt house on River Street to watch the races, but something seemed to be weighing on her mind that made her afraid to go there; she preferred to stand by the riverbank.
两人在河边站定不多久，顺顺便派人把他们请去了。	Though the two stayed in place there, it wasn't long before Shunshun sent someone to invite them in.
吊脚楼上已有了很多的人。	His house on stilts was already crowded.
早上过渡时，为翠翠所注意的乡绅妻女，受顺顺家的款待，占据了最好窗口，一见到翠翠，那女孩子就说：「你来，你来！」	The upper-class country mother and daughter that had caught Cuicui's eye when she ferried them that morning occupied the two best seats in the house, by the window. The daughter spotted Cuicui and said: "Come here, over here!"
翠翠带着点儿羞怯走去，坐在他们身后条凳上，祖父便走开了。	Cuicui went over, a little self-consciously, and sat on a bench behind them. Grandpa set off.
祖父并不看龙船竞渡，却为一个熟人拉到河上游半里路远近，到一个新碾坊看水碾子去了。	Instead of watching the dragon boats race, Grandpa let an acquaintance lead him away to see the new grain mill and its water-powered stone roller a quarter-mile upstream.
老船夫对于水碾子原来就极有兴味的。	The old ferryman happened to be intensely interested in that mill.
倚山滨水来一座小小茅屋，屋中有那么一个圆石片子，固定在一个横轴上，斜斜的搁在石槽里。	In a tiny thatched hut nestled between the mountain and the river was the round millstone, fixed vertically on a horizontal axle and resting at a tilt on top of a circular pathway of crushed stone along which it would make its revolutions.
当水闸门抽去时，流水冲激地下的暗轮，上面的石片便飞转起来。	When the sluice gate was pulled up, water rushed down upon a concealed underground wheel, and the round millstone up above flew into action, rotating on its axle as it made its rounds over the circular pathway under it.
作主人的管理这个东西，把毛谷倒进石槽中去，把碾好的米弄出放在屋角隅筛子里，再筛去糠灰。	The miller poured his unhusked rice into the groove of the stone circuit on the bottom.  When the polished rice came out, he sifted away the powdery chaff in a rectangular bamboo sieve basket he kept in the corner of the hut.
地上全是糠灰，主人头上包着块白布帕子，头上肩上也全是糠灰。	The floor was covered in this dust from the chaff, and so were the miller's head and shoulders, from top to bottom, including the white cloth he wrapped around his head like a turban.
天气好时就在碾坊前后隙地里种些萝卜、青菜、大蒜、四季葱。	In good weather he went out to the open spaces around the millhouse, where he planted turnips, cabbages, garlic, and scallions.
水沟坏了，就把裤子脱去，到河里去堆砌石头修理泄水处。	When the millrace got damaged, he took off his trousers and went into the river to pile up rocks so as to plug the leak.
水碾坝若修筑得好，还可装个小小鱼梁，涨小水时就自会有鱼上梁来，不劳而获！	Once his dikes were firmly built, he could build a net of branches across the millrace, like a bridge.  When the waters rose, fish would swim right over the dike into it, without the miller's having to lift a finger!
在河边管理一个碾坊比管理一只渡船多变化有趣味，情形一看也就明白了。	Compared to running a ferry, running a mill was a more multifaceted and interesting job; that was clear at a glance.
但一个撑渡船的若想有座碾坊，那简直是不可能的妄想。	But it was wholly in vain for a ferryman to hope to have a mill someday.
凡碾坊照例是属于当地小财主的产业。	Mills all belonged to the local rich people.
那熟人把老船夫带到碾坊边时，就告给他这碾坊业主为谁。	The old ferryman's friend told him who the mill's owner was.
两人一面各处视察一面说话。	The two men looked over every corner of it as they chatted.
那熟人用脚踢着新碾盘说：	The ferryman's friend kicked the new millstone and said:
「中寨人自己坐在高山砦子上，却欢喜来到这大河边置产业；这是中寨王团总的，大钱七百吊！」	"The people of Middle Stockade live up high in the mountains, but they like to buy property down here by the river; this mill belongs to Middle Stockade's Militia Captain Wang. Cost him seven hundred strings of cash, a thousand coppers to a string!"
老船夫转着那双小眼睛，很羡慕的去欣赏一切，估计一切，把头点着，且对于碾坊中对象一一加以很得体的批评。	The old ferryman rolled his small eyes and nodded, sizing up everything enviously and appreciatively, even offering fitting criticisms of every constituent part.
后来两人就坐到那还未完工的白木条凳上去，熟人又说到这碾坊的将来，似乎是团总女儿陪嫁的妆奁。	Then the two men took a seat on a still-unfinished bench.  The friend went on about this mill's future  it probably would be the dowry of the militia captain's daughter.
那人于是想起了翠翠，且记起大老托过他的事情来了，便问道：	Then he thought of Cuicui, and remembered something that Shunshun's No. 1 had asked him to do for him.  He inquired,
「伯伯，你翠翠今年十几岁？」	"Uncle, how old is Cuicui now?"
「满十四进十五岁。」老船夫说过这句话后，便接着在心中计算过去的年月。	"Thirteen, going on fourteen." Having said this, the old ferryman continued counting up the years and months to himself.
「十四岁多能干！将来谁得她真有福气！」	"What a clever girl for a thirteen-year-old! Whoever gets matched to her will be a lucky fellow!"
「有什么福气？又无碾坊陪嫁，一个光人。」	"How so? She doesn't have any such mill for a dowry. She'll go empty-handed."
「别说一个光人，一个有用的人，两只手抵得五座碾坊！洛阳桥也是鲁般两只手造的！－－」这样那样的说着，说到后来，那人笑了。	"Don't call her that, she's a hard worker. Her two hands are worth more than five mills! Lu Ban built the bridge at Luoyang with his two hands! " He went on, trying to refute the old ferryman, until he laughed at his own words.
老船夫也笑了，心想：「翠翠有两只手将来也去造洛阳桥吧，新鲜事！」	The old ferryman laughed too, thinking to himself: "Cuicui has two hands all right, but if she built a Luoyang Bridge, that would be a first!"
那人过了一会又说：	The other man paused and then said:
「茶峒人年青男子眼睛光，选媳妇也极在行。伯伯，你若不多我的心时，我就说个笑话给你听。」	"Young men here in Chadong have good eyes and they're very good at picking their wives. Uncle, if it wouldn't offend you, I'd like to tell you a funny little story."
老船夫问：「是什么笑话。」	"What funny story?" asked the old ferryman.
那人说：「伯伯你若不多心时，这笑话也可以当真话去听咧。」	The other said, "Uncle, don't be upset with me, but you can take this one seriously, if you want."
接着说的下去就是顺顺家大老如何在人家赞美翠翠，且如何托他来探听老船夫口气那么一件事。	He went on to say how No. 1 in Shunshun's family had praised Cuicui and sent him on an errand of inquiring about the old ferryman's opinion.
末了同老船夫来转述另一回会话的情形。	Finally he related another conversation he'd had.
「我问他：『大老，大老，你是说真话还是说笑话？』他就说：『你为我去探听探听那老的，我欢喜翠翠，想要翠翠，是真话！』	"I asked him, 'No. 1, are you in earnest or are you playing with me?' He replied, 'Go sound out the old man for me, will you?  I'm sweet on Cuicui, I long for her!  I mean it!'
我说：『我这口钝得很，说出了口老的一巴掌打来呢？』	So I said, 'I'm very blunt in expressing myself, and once I speak, I can't take it back  just suppose, what if the old man slaps me one?'
他说：『你怕打，你先当笑话去说，不会挨打的！』	He said, 'If you're afraid of his reaction, tell it first as something humorous.  That'll save you from any beating!'
所以，伯伯，我就把这件真事情当笑话来同你说了。	So you see, Uncle, this funny story I told you is about something real.
你试想想，他初九从川东回来见我时，我应当如何回答他？」	Think it over.  When he comes to see me after he returns from Eastern Sichuan on the ninth of the month, what should I tell him?"
老船夫记前一次大老亲口所说的话，知道大老的意思很真，且知道顺顺也欢喜欢翠翠，心里很高兴。	The old ferryman recalled what No. 1 had said in his own words during his last visit.  He knew that No. 1 had spoken frankly, and also that Shunshun liked Cuicui, so he was elated.
但这件事照规矩得这个人带封点心亲自到碧溪岨家中去说，方见得慎重起事，老船夫就说：「等他来时你说：老家伙听过了笑话后，自己也说了个笑话，他说，『车是车路，马是马路，各有走法。	But local custom said that No. 1 would have to come in person with gifts of cakes to Green Creek Hill and speak for himself to prove his seriousness.  The old ferryman said, "When he gets home, you tell him that after hearing your funny story, the old codger told one of his own  'In a game of chess, the chariot  the rook  moves one way and the horseman  the knight  another.
大老走的是车路，应当由大老爹爹作主，请了媒人来正正经经同我说。	If No. 1 wants to make his move directly like a chariot, his father ought to ask a go-between and put the proposition to me in the proper way.
走的是马路，应当自己作主，站在渡口对溪高崖上，为翠翠唱三年六个月的歌。』」	If he wants to move like a horseman, hurdling all obstacles, it's his play, to stand on the bluffs across the creek from the ferry and sing for Cuicui's heart until he's won her  for "three years and six months," if that's what it takes, as it says in the song.'"
「伯伯，若唱三年六个月的歌动得了翠翠的心，我赶明天就自己来唱歌了。」	"Uncle, if singing to her for three years and six months can move her heart, I'll start tomorrow and try to win her myself!"
「你以为翠翠肯了我还会不肯吗？」	"If Cuicui were willing, do you think I could refuse?"
「不咧，人家以为这件事你老人家肯了，翠翠便无有不肯呢。」	"That's not it. People think that if you make the decision, Cuicui can't object."
「不能那么说，这是她的事呵！」	"That's not right. This is about her!"
「便是她的事，可是必需老的作主，人家也仍然以为在日头月光下唱三年六个月的歌，还不如得伯伯说一句话好！」	"Even if it is, the elder has to have the final say. People will still think that singing three years and six months, be it under sunlight or moonlight, is less important than a good word from you!"
「那么，我说，我们就这样办，等他从川东回来时要他同顺顺去说明白。	"In that case, let's do it this way. When he returns home from Sichuan, have him talk it over with Shunshun.  Meanwhile, I'll ask Cuicui.
我呢，我也先问问翠翠；苦以为听了三年六个月的歌再跟那唱歌人走去有意思些，我就请你劝大老走他那弯弯曲曲的马路。」	If she prefers to follow a man who's sung for her three years and six months, I'll have to ask you to persuade No. 1 to choose that zigzag horseman's move."
「那好的。见了他我就说：『大老，笑话吗，我已说过了。真话呢，看你自己的命运去了。』	"Fine. When I see him, I'll say: 'No. 1, I told him the words in jest. As to the words in truth, that will depend on your fate.'
当真看他的命运去了，不过我明白他的命运，还是在你老人家手上捏着的。」	And so it will be, but I know that his fate still lies tightly within your grasp, old fellow."
「不是那么说！我若捏得定这件事，我马上就答应了。」	"That's not true! If it were within my grasp to decide this matter, I'd agree right away!"
这里两人把话说妥后，就过另一处看一只顺顺新近买来的三舱船去了。	With that settled, the two went to see a new, three-cabin boat that Shunshun had just purchased.
河街上顺顺吊脚楼方面，却有了如下事情。	Meanwhile, things had been going on in Shunshun's stilt house along River Street.
翠翠虽被那乡绅女孩喊到身边去坐，地位非常之好，从窗口望出去，河中一切朗然在望，然而心中可不安宁。	Cuicui had gone to sit near the daughter of the rich folk from the countryside.  Her location was spectacular; everything out on the river was clearly visible from the window, but Cuicui felt a little ill at ease.
挤在其他几个窗口看热闹的人，似乎皆常常把眼光从河中景物挪到这边几个人身上来。	The people who crowded around the other windows to see the excitement all seemed frequently to divert their gaze from the river to Cuicui and her company.
还有些人故意装成有别的事情样子，从楼这边走过那一边，事实上却全为得是好仔细看看翠翠这方面几个人。	Some even pretended to have some reason for passing by, when in fact they were just interested in sizing up these people Cuicui was sitting with.
翠翠心中老不自在，只想借故跑去。	Cuicui felt uneasy.  She just wanted an excuse to run away.
一会儿河下的炮声响了，几只从对河取齐的船只，直向这方面划来。	Soon a cannon sounded out on the river and several boats that had assembled on the farther shore rowed straight toward them.
先是四条船皆相去不远，如四枝箭在水面射着，到了一半，已有两只船占先了些，再过一会子，那两只船中间便又有一只超过了并进的船只而前。	Four boats took the lead in close formation, like four arrows shooting evenly through the water.
看看船到了税局门前时，第二次炮声又响，那船便胜利了。这时节胜利的已判明属于河街人所划的一只，各处便皆响着庆祝的小鞭炮。	Halfway across, two had already gone ahead of the others, and a little later, one of those pulled into the lead.  As the spectators saw it reach the customs house, another cannon shot announced the victory.  One could begin to make out that the winning boat was the one belonging to River Street.  Congratulatory firecrackers were heard all around.
那船于是沿了河街吊脚楼划去，鼓声蓬蓬作响，河边与吊脚楼各处，都同时呐喊表示快乐的祝贺。	The victors rowed past the stilt houses of River Street, their drum pounding as crowds along the streets and in the dangling foot houses shouted out joyous congratulations.
翠翠眼见在船头站定摇动小旗指挥进退头上包着红布的那个年青人，便是送酒葫芦到碧溪岨的二老，心中便印着三年前的旧事，「大鱼吃掉你！」	Cuicui noticed that the red-turbaned young man standing firmly in the prow, brandishing the little flag that gave the crew directions, was none other than No. 2  the one who had returned the gourd of wine to Green Creek Hill.  Her mind flashed back to events two years earlier. "A big fish might eat you!"
「吃掉不吃掉，不用你管！」「狗，狗，你也看人叫！」想起狗，翠翠才注意到自己身边那只黄狗，已不知跑到什么地方去，便离了座位，在楼上各处找寻她的黄狗，把船头人忘掉了。	"Whether it eats me or not, it's no concern of yours!" "All right, I won't worry about it!" "Hey, dog, save your barks for those who are worth it!" At that, Cuicui remembered the yellow dog that had come with her. She'd long since lost him, so she got up from her place and searched all over the house, completely forgetting the young man in the prow of the boat.
她一面在人丛里找寻黄狗，一面听人家正说些什么话。	As she looked for her dog in the crowd, she overheard some conversations.
一个大脸妇人问：「是谁家的人，坐到顺顺家当中窗口前的那块好地方？」	A woman with a broad face asked, "Whose family is she from, to get that prime seat in front of a window at Shunshun's house?"
一个妇人就说：「是砦子上王乡绅家大姑娘，今天说是来看船，其实来看人，同时也让人看！	Another woman responded, "She's the daughter of the country gentleman Wang up in one of the stockades. They say they came to see the boats, but really they're here to look over people  and be looked at!
人家命好，有福分坐那好地方！」	They must be something, to merit such a good place!"
「看谁人？被谁看？」	"Who's come to look at whom?"
「嗨，你还不明白，那乡绅想同顺顺打亲家呢。」	"Goodness, don't you know  that country gentleman wants his daughter to marry into Shunshun's family."
「那姑娘配什么人？是大老，还是二老？」	"Who might they want to betroth to her? No. 1 or No. 2?"
「说是二老呀，等等你们看这岳云，就会上楼来看他丈母娘的！」	"No. 2. Just wait, and we'll see this Yue Yun come up and pay respects to his future mother-in-law!"
另一个女人便插嘴说：「事弄妥了，好得很呢！人家有一座崭新碾坊陪嫁，比十个长年还好一些。」	Another woman cut in: "The match is made, and it's a good one! The girl brings as dowry a brand-new mill by the river, which can do the work of ten hired laborers."
有人问：「二老怎么样？可乐意？」	Someone asked, "What does No. 2 think about that?"
有人就轻轻的说：「二老已说过了，这不必看。第一件事我就不想作那个碾坊的主人！」	Yet another person whispered, "No. 2 said, 'I don't need to look at her. To start with, I don't want to be a miller!'"
「你听岳云二老亲口说吗？」	"Did you hear Yue Yun say that?"
「我听别人说的。还说二老欢喜一个撑渡船的。」	"That's what someone told me. They also said that No. 2 likes that girl at the ferry."
「他又不是傻小二，不要碾坊，要渡船吗？」	"He's no dummy; if he doesn't want to be a miller, would he really want to be a ferryman?"
「那谁知道。横顺人是『牛肉炒韭菜，各人心里爱』，只看各人心里爱什么就吃什么。渡船不会不如碾坊！」	"Who knows? Anyway, as the saying goes, 'People eat what they like, even beef with chives.' A ferryboat needn't be any worse than a grain mill!"
当时各人眼睛对着河里，口中说着这些闲话，却无一个人回头来注意到身后边的翠翠。	They were all looking at the river as they gossiped, so no one noticed that Cuicui was right behind them.
翠翠脸发火发烧走到另外一处去，又听有两个人提到这件事。	Cuicui went away, her face burning with embarrassment, only to hear another pair of women talking about these same things.
且说：「一切早安排好了，只须要二老一句话。」又说：「只看二老今天那么一股劲儿，就可以猜想得出这劲儿是岸上一个黄花姑娘给他的！」	"Everything is settled. They're just waiting for No. 2 to give the word." And, "Just from the spirit that No. 2 showed in today's race, you could almost guess that he got it from a young maiden watching him from onshore!"
谁是激动二老的黄花姑娘？听到这个，翠翠心中不免有点儿乱。	Who was this young maiden who so moved No. 2?
翠翠人矮了些，在人背后已望不见河中情形，只听到敲鼓声渐近渐激越，岸上呐喊声自远而近，便知道二老的船恰恰经过楼下。	Cuicui was too short to see over the people and take in the river scenes now.  It was only from the swelling of the drumbeats as they drew nearer and more frantic, and the rise in hubbub from the crowd onshore, that she realized that No. 2's boat had rowed up to the house.
楼上人也大喊着，杂夹叫着二老的名字，乡绅太太那方面，且有人放小百子鞭炮。	People upstairs in the house were cheering, too, and calling out No. 2's name; over by the rich lady from the countryside, they were setting off strings of hundred-pop firecrackers.
忽然又用另外一种惊讶声音喊着，且同时便见许多人出门向河下走去。	Suddenly there arose other shouts, of astonishment and dismay, as a crowd of people went out the door to go down to the river.
翠翠不知出了什么事，心中有点迷乱，正不知走回原来座位边去好，还是依然站在人背后好。	Not knowing what had gone wrong, Cuicui felt a little confused.  She didn't know whether to go back to her original seat or keep standing in back of the spectators.
只见那边正有人拿了个托盘，装了一大盘粽子同细点心，在请乡绅太太小姐用点心，不好意思再过那边去，便想也挤出大门外到河下去看看。	But just then a tray full of zongzi and fine cakes was set before the rich country lady and her little miss, so Cuicui felt uncomfortable going back there.  She decided to squeeze out the door and see what was going on by the river.
从河街一个盐店旁边甬道下河时，正在一排吊脚楼的梁柱间，迎面碰头一群人，拥着那个头包红布的二老来了。	A passageway next to a salt company led from River Street down to the water, under overhanging beams and rafters.  She emerged head-on into a crowd of people swarming around No. 2 in his red turban.
原来二老因失足落水，已从水中爬起来了。	He had slipped and fallen into the water, but made his way out on his own.
路太窄了一些，翠翠虽闪过一旁，与迎面来的人仍然得肘子触着肘子。	Cuicui dodged to get out of the way, but the path was so narrow that she still found herself elbow-to-elbow with the oncoming surge of people.
二老一见翠翠就说：	No. 2 spotted Cuicui and said,
「翠翠，你来了，爷爷也来了吗？」	"Cuicui, you came! Did your grandfather come, too?"
翠翠脸还发着烧不便作声，心想：「黄狗跑到什么地方去了呢？」	Her face flushed crimson, Cuicui was too embarrassed to speak. She thought to herself, "Where has my yellow dog run off to?"
二老又说：	No. 2 continued:
「怎不到我家楼上去看呢？我已要人替你弄了个好位子。」	"Why not go up to my house to watch the proceedings? I told them to save you a good seat."
翠翠心想：「碾坊陪嫁，希奇事情咧。」	Cuicui thought to herself: "A mill for a dowry  how fine is that?"
二老不能逼迫翠翠回去，到后便各自走开了。	No. 2 couldn't persuade Cuicui to go back, so they went their separate ways.
翠翠到河下时，小小心中充满了一种说不分明的东西。	When she got to the river, her young heart was filled with feelings she could not understand.
是烦恼吧，不是！	Was she annoyed?  No!
是忧愁吧，不是！	Worried?  Not that, either.
是快乐吧，不，有什么事情使这个女孩子快乐呢？	Happy, then?  No, what would she be happy about?
是生气了吧，－－是的，她当真彷佛觉得自己是在生一个人的气，又像是在生自己的气。	Angry, perhaps.  Yes, that was it, she seemed to be angry at someone, and also at herself.
河边人太多了，码头边浅水中，船桅船篷上，以至于吊脚楼的柱子上，也莫不有人。	It was so crowded there by the river.
翠翠自言自语说：「人那么多，有什么三脚猫好看？	In the shallow waters by the docks, in the rigging and on the awnings of the boats, even among the support columns of the stilt houses, people were everywhere.
」先还以为可以在什么船上发现她的祖父，但搜寻了一阵，各处却无祖父的影子。	Cuicui mumbled to herself: "Why all the commotion? Did somebody find a three-legged cat?" She had hoped to find her grandfather on one of the boats, but after checking them all, she found no sign of him.
她挤到水边去，一眼便看到了自己家中那条黄狗，同顺顺家一个长年，正在去岸数丈一只空船上看热闹。	She jostled her way down to the riverbank and spotted the yellow dog enjoying the excitement with one of Shunshun's laborers in an empty boat a few yards from shore.
翠翠锐声叫喊了两声，黄狗张着耳叶昂头四面一望，便猛的扑下水中，向翠翠方面泅来了。	Cuicui called him twice in a shrill voice.  The yellow dog pricked up his ears and head, looking all around, before bounding into the river and swimming to Cuicui.
到了身边时狗身上已全是水，把水抖着且跳跃不已，翠翠便说：「得了，装什么疯。你又不翻船，谁要你落水呢？」	Soaked by the time he got to her, he shook himself and jumped up and down without cease, until Cuicui shouted, "Enough! What is this craziness, dog? Your boat didn't turn over. Who asked you to jump into the water?"
翠翠同黄狗找祖父去，在河街上一个木行前恰好遇着了祖父。	Cuicui and the yellow dog looked for Grandpa everywhere. They ran into him in front of a lumber store on River Street.
老船夫说：「翠翠，我看了个好碾坊，碾盘是新的，水车是新的，屋上稻草也是新的！	The old ferryman said, "Cuicui, I've just seen a first-rate grain mill! The millstone is new and so is the waterwheel  even the roof thatching is fresh!
水坝管着一绺水，急溜溜的，抽水闸时水车转得如陀螺。」	The dam releases water in such a raging torrent that when the sluice gate is pulled up, it gets the waterwheel to spinning like a top."
翠翠带着点做作问：「是什么人的？」	"Whose mill is it?" Cuicui asked, a little affectedly.
「是什么人的？住在山上的王团总的。	"Whose mill? Why, Squire Wang's, who lives up in the mountains at Middle Stockade, the militia captain.
我听人说是那中寨人为女儿作嫁妆的东西，好不阔气，包工就是七百吊大钱，还不管风车，不管家什！」	I've heard tell that it will be his daughter's dowry. Now that's extravagance for you.  Building it cost them seven hundred strings of cash, not including the windmill or the furnishings!"
「谁讨那个人家的女儿？」	"Who's going to marry his daughter?"
祖父望着翠翠干笑着，「翠翠，大鱼咬你，大鱼咬你。」	Grandpa looked at Cuicui and forced a smile. "A big fish is going to bite you. He'll bite you."
翠翠因为对于这件事心中有了个数目，便仍然装着全不明白，只询问祖父，「爷爷，谁个人得到那个碾坊？」	Precisely because she knew a thing or two about this matter, Cuicui pretended not to understand. She pressed Grandpa: "Grandfather, who will get that mill?"
「岳云二老！」祖父说了又自言自语的说，「有人羡慕二老得到碾坊，也有人羡慕碾坊得到二老！」	"No. 2, Yue Yun!" Grandpa said, also muttering to himself. "Some people envy No. 2 for getting the mill; others envy the mill for getting No. 2!"
「谁羡慕呢，爷爷？」	"Who's envious, Grandfather?"
「我羡慕。」祖父说着便又笑了。	"I'm envious," Grandpa said, with a smile.
翠翠说：「爷爷，你喝醉了。」	Cuicui said, "Grandfather, you're drunk."
「可是二老还称赞你长得美呢。」	"But No. 2 says you're very pretty."
翠翠说：「爷爷，你醉疯了。」	Cuicui: "Grandfather, you're crazy."
祖父说：「爷爷不醉不疯－－去，我们到河边看他们放鸭子去。」	Grandpa said, "Your grandfather is not drunk and he's not crazy. Come on, let's go down to the river and see them release the ducks. Too bad I'm too old to dive in and catch one to bring home and cook in a pot with ginger."
他还想说，「二老捉得鸭子，一定又会送给我们的。」话不及说，二老来了，站在翠翠面前微笑着。翠翠也微笑着。	He wanted to add: "If No. 2 catches a duck, he'll give it to us." But before he could say it, up came No. 2. He stood before Cuicui and smiled. Cuicui smiled back.
于是三个人回到吊脚楼上去。	The three of them went back up to the house on stilts.
第十一章	CHAPTER ELEVEN
有人带了礼物到碧溪岨，掌水码头的顺顺，当真请了媒人为儿子向渡船的攀亲起来了。	A man arrived at Green Creek Hill bearing gifts.  Dockmaster Shunshun had indeed asked a matchmaker to go to the ferry to seek matrimonial relations for his first son.
老船夫慌慌张张把这个人渡过溪口，一同到家里去。	Flustered, the old ferryman brought him across the creek and into the house.
翠翠正在屋门前剥豌豆，来了客并不如何注意。	Cuicui, who was shelling peas outside by the door, at first paid the guest little attention.
但一听到客人进门说「贺喜贺喜」，心中有事，不敢再待在屋门边，就装作追赶菜园地的鸡，拿了竹响篙唰唰的摇着，一面口中轻轻喝着，向屋后白塔跑去了。	But when she heard the matchmaker say, "Congratulations, congratulations," at the door, she began to worry. Unwilling to squat by the front door any longer, she pretended to be shooing away the chickens in the vegetable garden.  Flailing a bamboo whistling pole in the air, she softly scolded them as she ran toward the white pagoda in back.
来人说了些闲话，言归正传转述到顺顺的意见时，老船夫不知如何回答，只是很惊惶的搓着两只茧结的大手，好像这不会真有其事，而且神气中只像在说：「那好，那好，」其实这老头子却不曾说过一句话。	The visitor made small talk. When they got around to the matter at hand, namely Shunshun's initiative, the old ferryman didn't know how to respond. He could only rub his big, calloused hands together, as if he couldn't believe it. The expression on his face seemed to say: "Fine, this is wonderful," yet the old man said not a word in reply.
马兵把话说完后，就问作祖父的意见怎么样。	When the visitor finished, he asked Grandpa what he thought about it.
老船夫笑着把头点着说：「大老想走车路，这个很好。可是我得问问翠翠，看她自己主意怎么样。」来人走后，祖父在船头叫翠翠下河边来说话。	The old ferryman smiled and nodded: "So No. 1 wants to make the chariot's move, that's just fine. But I must ask Cuicui, to get her reaction." After he had seen off the visitor, Grandpa stood in the prow of the boat and called Cuicui down to the river for a talk.
翠翠拿了一簸箕豌豆下到溪边，上了船，娇娇的问他的祖父：「爷爷，你有什么事？」祖父笑着不说什么，只偏着个白发盈颠的头看着翠翠，看了许久。	Bringing a pan of peas down with her to the stream, Cuicui boarded the boat and asked her grandpa, with all the charm she could muster, "Grandfather, what is it?" Grandpa smiled in silence. Tilting his hoary white head, he looked at Cuicui for a long time. Cuicui sat down in the boat, a little taken aback.
翠翠坐到船头，低下头去剥豌豆，耳中听着远处竹篁里的黄鸟叫。	She bent over to continue shelling her peas when she heard the call of a yellow finch from the bamboo grove.
翠翠想：「日子长咧，爷爷话也长了。」翠翠心轻轻的跳着。	Cuicui thought: "The days are growing longer, and Grandfather is taking longer to get his words out, too." Her heart was gently pounding.
过了一会祖父说：「翠翠，翠翠，先前来的那个伯伯来作什么，你知道不知道？」	After another pause, Grandpa said: "Cuicui  Cuicui  do you know what that visit was all about?"
翠翠说：「我不知道。」说后脸同颈脖全红了。	Cuicui answered, "No, I don't." But her face and neck flushed crimson.
祖父看看那种情景，明白翠翠的心事了，便把眼睛向远处望去，在空雾里望见了十五年前翠翠的母亲，老船夫心中异常柔和了。轻轻的自言自语说：「每一只船总要有个码头，每一只雀儿得有个巢。」	Observing all this, Grandpa sensed Cuicui's anxiety and looked up far away across the sky. In the mist he saw Cuicui's mother as she was fifteen years earlier, and his heart melted.  He said, under his breath, "Every boat needs a berth, and every sparrow needs a nest."
他同时想起那个可怜的母亲过去的事情，心中有了一点隐痛，却勉强笑着。	He began to think about the unhappy fate of Cuicui's mother. His heart ached and he smiled with difficulty.
翠翠呢，正从山中黄鸟杜鹃叫声里，以及山谷中伐竹人唦唦一下一下的砍伐竹子声音里，想到许多事情。	And Cuicui  Cuicui was thinking about so many things, amid the calls of the finches and cuckoo birds in the mountains and the chops of lumbermen felling bamboos in the valleys.
老虎咬人的故事，与人对骂时四句头的山歌，造纸作坊中的方坑，铁工厂熔铁炉里泄出的铁汁－－耳朵听来的，眼睛看到的，她似乎都要去温习温习。	Stories of tigers eating people, and the mountain songs people sang to belittle and make fun of each other, the square pit in which papermakers mixed their pulp, the molten iron that flowed out of a foundry smelting furnace  she felt compelled to recollect everything her ears had heard and her eyes had seen.
她其所以这样作，又似乎全只为了希望忘掉眼前的一桩事而起。	It seemed to be her way of putting aside the present matter and wishing it away.
但她实在有点误会了。	And yet she misunderstood what was really going on.
祖父说：「翠翠，船总顺顺家里请人来作媒，想讨你作媳妇，问我愿不愿。我呢，人老了，再过三年两载会过去的，我没有不愿的事情。这是你自己的事，你自己想想，自己来说。愿意，就成了；不愿意，也好。」	Grandpa said: "Cuicui, Fleetmaster Shunshun's family invited a matchmaker to ask for you as their daughter-in-law. They sought my permission. But I'm old.  I might pass from the scene a couple of years from now, so it's not fit for me to delay things. This is all about you.  You think it over and you give me your decision. If you're willing, then it's settled.  If not, that's all right, too."
翠翠不知如何处理这个问题，装作从容，怯怯的望着老祖父。	Cuicui had no idea what to do.  Pretending to be unruffled, she timidly eyed her old grandpa.
又不便问什么，当然也不好回答。	She didn't feel like asking for an explanation, and certainly not like giving an answer.
祖父又说：「大老是个有出息的人，为人又正直，又慷慨，你嫁了他，算是命好！」	Grandpa added: "No. 1 is a man of good prospects. He's fair-minded and generous. If you marry him, you can say you're blessed with good fate!"
翠翠明白了，人来做媒的大老！	Cuicui understood for the first time: the intended match was with No. 1!
不曾把头抬起，心忡忡的跳着，脸烧得厉害，仍然剥她的豌豆，且随手把空豆菜抛到水中去，望着它们在流水中从从容容的流去，自己也俨然从容了许多。	She didn't raise her head. Her heart beat fast and her face burned as she went on shelling her peas, from time to time throwing empty pods into the creek and watching them drift slowly downstream, as if she had calmed down.
见翠翠总不作声，祖父于是笑了，且说：	Grandpa responded to Cuicui's silence with a smile.
「翠翠，想几天不碍事。	"Cuicui, it's fine if you want to think it over for a few days.
洛阳桥并不是一个晚上造得好的，要日子咧。	Luoyang Bridge wasn't built overnight.
前次那人来的就向我说到这件事，我已经就告过他：车是车路，马是马路，各有规矩。	You've got time.  When No. 1 came the time before, he spoke to me about this and I told him then: chariots have to move like chariots, and horsemen like horsemen, according to the rules.
想爸爸作主，请媒人正正经经来说是车路；要自己作主，站到对溪高崖竹林里为你唱三年六个月的歌是马路，－－你若欢喜走马路，我相信人家会为你在日头下唱热情的歌，在月光下唱温柔的歌，一直唱到吐血喉咙烂！」	If his father was going to take charge of this, he had to have a matchmaker do it according to custom  that's how chariots move; if he wanted to take charge of it himself, he had to go up into the bamboo grove on the bluffs across the creek and sing for you, three years and six months  that's the horseman's move.  If you prefer the horseman's move, I'm sure he'll sing passionate songs during the day and tender ones in the moonlight, like a nightingale, singing his throat out until he spits blood!"
翠翠不作声，心中只想哭，可是也无理由可哭。	Cuicui remained silent.  She felt like crying, but for no apparent reason.
祖父再说下去，便引到死去了的母亲来了。	Grandpa got to talking again, and now he came to Cuicui's dead mother.
老人说了一阵，沉默了。	After a while, he fell silent.
翠翠悄悄把头撂过一些，祖父眼中业已酿了一汪眼泪。	Dipping her head in sadness, Cuicui could see tears in her grandpa's eyes.
翠翠又惊又怕怯生生的说：「爷爷，你怎么的？」祖父不作声，用大手掌擦着眼睛，小孩子似的咕咕笑着，跳上岸跑回家中去了。	Upset and afraid, she fearfully asked him, "Grandfather, what's the matter?" Without saying a word, Grandpa clumsily wiped his eyes with the palm of his hand. He jumped ashore and ran home, giggling like a little boy.
翠翠心中乱乱的，想赶去却不赶去。	Upset, Cuicui couldn't bring herself to run after him.
雨后放晴的天气，日头炙到人肩上背上已有了点儿力量。	As it cleared up after the rain, the sun beat down painfully on people's backs and shoulders.
溪边芦苇水杨柳，菜园中菜蔬，莫不繁荣滋茂，带着一分有野性的生气。	The reeds and water-willow shrubs by the creek, like the vegetables in the garden, ran riot, bearing a hint of wild vitality.
草丛里绿色蚱蜢各处飞着，翅膀搏动空气时窸窸作声。	Green grasshoppers flew among the thick grasses, their wings setting a stir in the wind.
枝头新蝉声音已渐渐洪大。	Newly emerged cicadas on the branches had not yet set up a din, but their noise was gradually strengthening.
两山深翠逼人竹篁中，有黄鸟与竹雀杜鹃鸣叫。	In the stunning verdure of the emerald bamboo groves on the mountains, yellow finches, bamboo finches, and cuckoos sang in turn.
翠翠感觉着，望着，听着，同时也思索着：	Cuicui looked and listened, took it all in, and also reflected:
「爷爷今年七十岁－－三年六个月的歌－－谁送那只白鸭子呢？－－得碾子的好运运气，碾子得谁更是好运运气？－－」	"Grandfather is seventy this year  three years and six months  who gave us that white duck?  what luck to get that mill, or is the mill even luckier to get him? "
痴着，忽地站运气，半簸箕豌豆便倾倒到水中去了。	In her own little world, she stood up abruptly, spilling half her pan of peas into the creek.
伸手把那簸箕从水中捞运气时，隔溪有人喊过渡。	As she retrieved the pan from the water, someone hailed the ferry from the other shore.
第十二章	CHAPTER TWELVE
翠翠第二天在白塔下菜园地里，第二次被祖父询问到自己主张时，仍然心儿忡忡的跳着，把头低下不作理会，只顾用手去掐葱。	The next day, Cuicui was in the vegetable garden below the white pagoda again when Grandpa asked for her decision.  Her heart still pounding, she bowed her head as if she hadn't heard and went on picking her scallions.
祖父笑着，心想：「还是等等看，再说下去这一坪葱会全掐掉了。」同时似乎又觉得这其间有点古怪处，不好再说下去，便自己按捺到言语，用一个做作的笑话，把问题引到另外一件事情上去了。	Grandpa smiled and thought: "I'd better wait till later. If I keep at her, she'll pick every scallion in sight!" Yet he also sensed something strange in her manner. He couldn't very well continue in this vein, so he stifled his words and changed the subject with a contrived joke.
天气渐渐的越来越热了。	The weather was warming day by day.
近六月时，天气热了些，老船夫把一个满是灰尘的黑陶缸子从屋角隅里搬出，自己还匀出闲工夫，拼了几方木板作成一个圆盖。	It was hot by the time the sixth month drew near. The old ferryman found time to drag a black earthenware vat covered with dust out of the corner of the house and piece together some wood slats to make a round lid for it.
又锯木头作成一个三脚架子，且削刮了个大竹筒，用葛藤系定，放在缸边作为舀茶的家具。	He also took out his saw and made a tripod stand, whittled a big bamboo tube as a ladle for dipping out tea, then tied it to the vat with kudzu vine.
自从这茶缸移到屋门溪边后，每早上翠翠就烧一大锅开水，倒进那缸子里去。	After he'd moved this vat out the door to the stream bank, Cuicui would boil a big pot of water every morning to make tea.
有时缸里加些茶叶，有时却只放下一些用火烧焦的锅巴，乘那东西还燃着时便抛进缸里去。	Sometimes she'd add tea leaves; other times, she'd just drop in some burned crusts from their cooked rice.
老船夫且照例准备了些发痧肚痛治泡疮疡子的草根木皮，把这些药搁在家中当眼处，一见过渡人神气不对，就忙匆匆的把药取来，善意的勒迫这过路人使用他的药方，且告人这许多救急丹方的来源（这些丹方自然全是他从城中军医同巫师学来的）。	The old ferryman, as was his custom, prepared native cures from roots and tree bark to heal sunstroke, stomachaches, blisters, and sores.  He kept these medicines close at hand.  The moment he saw a passenger who didn't look right, he'd press the traveler to try his remedies, relating the source of his many prescriptions (it went without saying that he learned them from the medics and spirit healers in town).
他终日裸着两只膀子，在方头船上站定，头上还常常是光光的，一头短短白发，在日光下如银子。	Bare-armed the day long, he stood firm in his square-nosed ferryboat, often bare-headed, too, his short, white hair shining like silver in the sunlight.
翠翠依然是个快乐人，屋前屋后跑着唱着，不走动时就坐在门前高崖树荫下吹小竹管儿玩。	Cuicui acted happy, running around outside the house singing.  When not on the move, she sat in front of the house on the high bluffs, in the shade, playing her little bamboo flute.
爷爷彷佛把大老提婚的事早已忘掉，翠翠自然也早忘掉这件事情了。	Grandfather acted as if he had completely forgotten No. 1's marriage proposal, so of course Cuicui did, too.
可是那做媒的不久又来探口气了，依然是同从前一样，祖父把事情成否全推到翠翠身上去，打发了媒人上路。	But before long the matchmaker returned to sound them out.
回头又同翠翠谈了一次，也依然不得结果。	As before, Grandpa relegated the matter to Cuicui and sent the go-between back.  Later he had another talk with Cuicui, again without any resolution.
老船夫猜不透这事情在这什么方面有个疙瘩，解除不去，夜里躺在床上便常常陷入一种沉思里去，隐隐约约体会到一件事情－－翠翠爱二老不爱大老，想到了这里时，他笑了，为了害怕而勉强笑了。	The old ferryman couldn't guess what the obstacle was, or how to fix it.  He'd lie in bed, mulling it over until finally it began to occur to him that perhaps Cuicui loved the younger brother, not the elder.  That made him smile, an unnatural smile from fear.
其实他有点忧愁，因为他忽然觉得翠翠一切全像那个母亲，而且隐隐约约便感觉到这母女二人共同的命运。	In truth he was a little worried, because it suddenly occurred to him that Cuicui was like her mother in every way.  He had a vague feeling that mother and daughter would share the same fate.
一堆过去的事情蜂拥而来，不能再睡下去了，一个人便跑出门外，到那临溪高崖上去，望天上的星辰，听河边纺织娘以及一切虫类如雨的声音，许久许久还不睡觉。	Events of the past swarmed into his mind and he could no longer sleep.  He ran out the door alone, onto the high bluffs by the creek.  He looked up at the stars and listened to the katydids and sounds of the other insects, constant as rain.  He could not sleep for a very long time.
这件事翠翠是毫不注意的，这小女孩子日里尽管玩着，工作着，也同时为一些很神秘的东西驰骋她那颗小小的心，但一到夜里，却甜甜的睡眠了。	Cuicui, of course, was unaware of this. A young girl whose days were always filled with play and work, she felt something very mysterious racing within her little heart, but when night came, she went peacefully to sleep.
不过一切皆得在一份时间中变化。	And yet, everything changes with time.
这一家安静平凡的生活，也因了一堆接连而来的日子，在人事上把那安静空气完全打破了。	This family's quiet and ordinary life, as days came and went in succession, saw the peace in its human affairs completely broken.
船总顺顺家中一方面，则天保大老的事已被二老知道了，傩送二老同时也让他哥哥知道了弟弟的心事。	In Fleetmaster Shunshun's household, Tianbao's actions were already known to No. 2, and Nuosong let his elder brother know what was on his mind, too.
这一对难兄难弟原来同时爱上了那个撑渡船的外孙女。	They were brothers in the hardships of love, both loving the granddaughter of a ferryman.
这事情在本地人说来并不希奇，边地俗话说：「火是各处可烧的，水是各处可流的，日月是各处可照的，爱情是各处可到的。」	This did not seem at all peculiar to the local folk.  A common saying in the borderlands was: "Fire can burn and water can flow anywhere; sunshine and moonshine also reach everywhere; and so, too, does love."
有钱船总儿子，爱上一个弄渡船的穷人家女儿，不能成为希罕的新闻，有一点困难处，只是这两兄弟到了谁应取得这个女人作媳妇时，是不是也还得照茶峒人规矩，来一次流血的挣扎？	It was not remarkable that the sons of a rich fleetmaster had fallen in love with the granddaughter of a poor ferryman. There was one problem.  Would the brothers decide who would marry the girl by the usual Chadong practice of a bloody struggle?
兄弟两人在这方面是不至于动刀的，但也不作兴有「情人奉让」如大都市懦怯男子爱与仇对面时作出的可笑行为。	These brothers would never take up arms against each other, but neither were they accustomed to "yielding in the contest of love," like the laughable behavior of cowardly city males when faced with matters of love and hate.
那哥哥同弟弟在河上游一个造船的地方，看他家中那一只新船，在新船旁把一切心事全告给了弟弟，且附带说明，这点爱还是两年前植下根基的。	The elder took his younger brother to a shipbuilder's yard upstream to see the family's new boat, then told the younger boy all that was in his heart, adding that his affection had been growing for two years.
弟弟微笑着，把话听下去。	The younger brother heard him out with a smile on his face.
两人从造船处沿了河岸又走到王乡绅新碾坊去，那大哥就说：	The two boys followed the riverbank from the shipyard to Squire Wang's new grain mill.  The elder brother said:
「二老，你倒好，作了团总女婿，有座碾坊；我呢，若把事情弄好了，我应当接那个老的手来划渡船了。	"No. 2, you're lucky to be Militia Captain Wang's prospective son-in-law and have this mill; as for me, if I do things right, I'll be inheriting from that old man the right to row a ferryboat.
我欢喜这个事情，我还想把碧溪岨两个山头买过来，在界在线种大南竹，围着这一条小溪作为我的砦子」	But I'd like that.  I'd like to buy up the two hills at Green Creek Hill and plant stands of bamboo around the boundaries, fencing us in at our own little fortress by the stream!"
那二老仍然的听着，把手中拿的一把弯月形镰刀随意斫削路旁的草木，到了碾坊时，却站住了向他哥哥说：	No. 2 continued listening in silence. He hacked at grasses and shrubs by the roadside with his sickle. When they reached the mill, he stopped and told his brother:
「大老，你信不信这女子心上早已有了个人？」	"Elder Brother, would you believe me if I told you that this girl already has her heart set on another, and has for some time?"
「我不信。」	"Not a chance."
「大老，你信不信这碾坊将来归我？」	"Elder Brother, do you think this mill was meant for me?"
「我不信。」	"No."
两人于是进了碾坊。	They entered the millhouse.
二老说：「你不必－－大老，我再问你，假若我不想得这座碾坊，却打量要那只渡船，而且这念头也是两年前的事，你信不信呢？」	No. 2 continued: "Now don't  Well, Elder Brother, let me ask you again, suppose I didn't want this mill, but that ferryboat instead, and suppose, too, that I'd got this idea two years ago  would you believe that?"
那大哥听来真着了一惊，望了一下坐在碾盘横轴上的傩送二老，知道二老不是开玩笑，于是站近了一点，伸手在二老肩上拍打了一下，且想把二老拉下来。	Startled, the elder brother stared at his younger brother, Nuosong, sitting there on the horizontal axle of the mill roller.  Realizing that No. 2 was telling him what was in his heart, he came up to him and clapped him on the shoulder, as if to bring him down to the ground.
他明白了这件事，他笑了。	He understood now, and laughed.
他说，「我相信的，你说的是真话」	He said: "Now I believe you. Everything you've said is true!"
二老把眼睛望着他的哥哥，很诚实的说：	No. 2 looked back at his brother and said, with utter frankness:
「大老，相信我，这是真事。我早就那么打算到了。家中不答应，那边若答应了，我当真预备去弄渡船的！	"Elder Brother, believe me, this is the truth. This has been my plan for some time now. If her family agrees, even if ours doesn't, I truly mean to be a ferryman!
－－你告我，你呢？」	What about you, then?"
「爸爸已听了我的话，为我要城里的杨马兵做保山，向划渡船说亲去了」大老说到这个求亲手续时，好像知道二老要笑他，又解释要保山去的用意，只是因为老的说车有车路，马有马路，我就走了车路。	"Papa has already acted on my behalf. He had Horseman Yang come from town to be my matchmaker and deliver my proposal to the ferryman!" When No. 1 got to the part about how he went about it, as if aware that No. 2 might laugh at him, he explained why he wanted a go-between to do it: "You see, the old man said that chariots must move like chariots and horsemen must move like horsemen. So I adopted the direct way, the chariot's move."
「结果呢？」	"What was the response?"
「得不到什么结果。老的口上含李子，说不明白。」	"There's none yet. The old man talked out of both sides of his mouth."
「马路呢？」	"What about adopting the horseman's move?"
「马路呢，那老的说若走马路，得在碧溪岨对溪高崖上唱三年六个月的歌。	"The old man said that the horseman's move means singing for the girl from the bluffs across the creek for three years and six months.
把翠翠心唱软，翠翠就归我了。」	If I could bend Cuicui's heart toward me, she'd be mine."
「这并不是个坏主张」	"What a good idea!"
「是呀，一个结巴人话说不出还唱得出。可是这件事轮不到我了。我不是竹雀，不会唱歌。	"Maybe. Sometimes a stutterer can sing what he can't say. But that's not me. I'm no song sparrow; I haven't got the voice.
鬼知道那老的存心是要把孙女儿嫁个会唱歌的水车，还是预备规规矩矩嫁个人」	Who the hell knows whether the old man would rather marry his granddaughter to a singing waterwheel or to a real man!"
「那你怎么样？」	"What are you going to do, then?"
「我想告那老的，要他说句实在话。只一句话。	"I'd like to see the old man and get a straight answer out of him. Just get the word. If 'No,' I'll take a boat downstream to Taoyuan.
不成，我跟船下桃源去了；成呢，便是要我撑渡船，我也答应了他。」	If 'Yes,' I'll agree, even if it means tugging that ferryboat."
「唱歌呢？」	"Would you sing for her?"
「这是你的拿手好戏，你要去做竹雀你就去吧，我不会捡马粪塞你嘴巴的。」	"Younger Brother, that's your strong suit. If you want to be a song sparrow, hurry up and get to it. I won't stuff your mouth with horse manure."
二老看到哥哥那种样子，便知道为这件事哥哥感到的是一种如何烦恼了。	No. 2 could tell how upset his elder brother was.
他明白他哥哥的性情，代表了茶峒人粗卤爽直一面，弄得好，掏出心子来给人也很慷慨作去，弄不好，亲舅舅也必一是一二是二。	He knew his temper, which embodied the rough, straightforward side of the Chadong folk.  In the right circumstances, he'd tear out his heart for you; cross him, and he'd battle his own maternal uncle blow for blow.
大老何尝不想在车路上失败时走马路；但他一听到二老的坦白陈述后，他就知道马路只二老有分，自己的事不能提了。	If No. 1 met with failure after making the chariot's move, surely he would want to try the horseman's.  But once he'd heard his younger brother's frank profession, he realized that No. 2 would best him at the latter approach.  No. 1 hadn't a chance.
因此他有点运气恼，有点愤慨，自然是无从掩饰的。	Hence he was a little offended, a little indignant, and he couldn't hide it.
二老想出了个主意，就是两兄弟月夜里同到碧溪岨去唱歌，莫让人知道是弟兄两个，两人轮流唱下去，谁得到回答，谁便继续用那张唱歌胜利的嘴唇，服侍那划渡船的外孙女。	No. 2 had an idea: let the brothers go together to sing at Green Creek Hill one moonlit night, without letting on that there were two of them.
大老不善于唱歌，轮到大老时也仍然由二老代替。	They would sing in turn and whoever got a song in response could let his victorious lips take up the refrain for the ferryman's granddaughter.  Since No. 1 was not much of a singer, when it was his turn, No. 2 would sing for him.
两人运气命运来决定自己的幸福，这么办可说是极公平了。	What could be fairer than to let fate decide their future happiness?
提议时，那大老还以为他自己不会唱，也不想请二老替他作竹雀。	When he heard this proposal, No. 1, thinking that he could not sing for himself, didn't want his younger brother to be the song sparrow in his place.
但二老那种诗人性格，却使他很固持的要哥哥实行这个办法。	But No. 2, being of a poetic disposition, stubbornly insisted on this solution.
二老说必需这样作，一切才公平一点。	He said this was the only way, for it was completely fair and impartial.
大老把弟弟提议想想，作了一个苦笑。	No. 1 thought about his younger brother's suggestion some more and smiled wryly.
「×娘的，自己不是竹雀，还请老弟做竹雀！好，就是这样子，我们各人轮流唱，我也不要你帮忙，一切我自己来吧。	"Damn it all! I'm no songbird  so I'm going to ask my little brother to be one for me? All right, let's do it this way: we'll take turns singing, but I don't want any help from you.  I'll do all my own singing.
树林子里的猫头鹰，声音不动听，要老运气时，也仍然是自己叫下去，不请人帮忙的」	An owl in the forest can only screech, but when he wants a wife, he sings for himself, he doesn't hire a stand-in!"
两人把事情说妥当后，算算日子，今天十四，明天十五，后天十六，接连而来的三个日子，正是有大月亮天气。	Once in agreement, they picked the date.  The moon would be fullest this night, the fourteenth, and the two nights following.
气候既到了中夏，半夜里不冷不热，穿了白家机布汗褂，到那些月光照及的高崖上去，遵照当地的习惯，很诚实与坦白去为一个「初生之犊」的黄花女唱歌。	It was midsummer; the nights were neither too hot nor too cool.  Wearing plain white homespun undershirts, they'd ascend the high bluffs where the moon shined bright and, according to local custom, truthfully and earnestly sing for the girl  an unspoiled maiden, made unafraid by her innocence.
露水降了，歌声涩了，到应当回家了时，就趁残月赶回家去。	When it was time for them to go home, as the dew fell and their voices grew weak, they would make their way back in the dimming moonlight.
或过那些熟识的整夜工作不息的碾坊里去，躺到温暖的谷仓里小睡，等候天明。	Or they might stop at a familiar grain mill that operated all night without rest, lying down to sleep in the cozy barn until daybreak.
一切安排皆极其自然，结果是什么，两人虽不明白，但也看得极运气自然。	It was all so natural, and although neither brother could imagine the outcome, that would come just as naturally.
两人便决定了从当夜运气始，来作这种为当地习惯所认可的竞争。	They decided to do it that very night: engage in a competition honored by local custom.
第十三章	CHAPTER THIRTEEN
黄昏来时翠翠坐在家中屋后白塔下，看天空为夕阳烘成桃花色的薄云。	Cuicui sat beneath the white pagoda behind her house as dusk fell, watching wispy clouds in the sky burned peach-blossom pink by the setting sun.
十四中寨逢场，城中生意人过中寨收买山货的很多，过渡人也特别多，祖父在渡船上忙个不息。	The fourteenth of the month was market day at Middle Stockade. Many merchants from town went to that village fair to buy native products from the mountains, so ferry passengers were particularly abundant.  Grandpa worked on the ferryboat without rest.
天快夜了，别的雀子似乎都在休息了，只杜鹃叫个不息。	As nightfall descended, the songbirds fell quiet: only the cuckoos sang on without cease.
石头泥土为白日晒了一整天，草木为白日晒了一整天，到这时节皆放散一种热气。	The mud on the boulder had dried in the sun the day long, and so had the trees and grasses.  Now they were giving back their heat.
空气中有泥土气味，有草木气味，且有甲虫类气味。	The air smelled of damp soil, of the grasses and the trees, and also of beetles.
翠翠看着天上的红云，听着渡口飘乡生意人的杂乱声音，心中有些儿薄薄的凄凉。	Watching the pink clouds in the sky and listening to the jumble of voices from the merchants touring the countryside, Cuicui felt faintly despondent.
黄昏照样的温柔，美丽，平静。	The dusk was as serene as always, just as beautiful and peaceful.
但一个人若体念到这个当前一切时，也就照样的在这黄昏中会有点儿薄薄的凄凉。	Yet anyone in this situation would feel faintly despondent.
于是，这日子成为痛苦的东西了。	And so the days became a time of unhappiness.
翠翠觉得好像缺少了什么。	Cuicui felt that she was missing something.
好像眼见到这个日子过去了，想在一件新的人事上攀住它，但不成。	As she saw the days pass before her, she seemed to want to be caught up in a new kind of human relationship, yet it was beyond her.
好像生活太平凡了，忍受不住。	Life seemed too dull and ordinary.  She could bear it no longer.
「我要坐船下桃源县过洞庭湖，让爷爷满城打锣去叫我，点了灯笼火把去找我。」	"I want to sail a boat down past Taoyuan, across Lake Dongting. Let Granddad search for me all over town with a lantern, beating a gong and calling out my name."
她便同祖父故意生气似的，很放肆的去想到这样一件事，她且想象她出走后，祖父用各种方法寻觅全无结果，到后如何无可奈何躺在渡船上。	Letting her imagination run wild with this impossible development, she seemed purposely angry at Grandpa. She went on to imagine him searching for her everywhere to no avail, until finally he would lie down in his boat in defeat.
人家喊，「过渡，过渡，老伯伯，你怎么的，不管事！」「怎么的！翠翠走了，下桃源县了！」「那你怎么办？」「怎么办吗？拿把刀，放在包袱里，搭下水船去杀了她！」－－	Someone would shout, "Ferry me across, uncle. What's wrong with you? You're not doing your job!" "What's wrong? Cuicui is gone, she's gone down to Taoyuan County!" "What are you going to do about that?" "You know what? I'm going to pack a knife and catch a boat downstream, so I can kill her!"
翠翠彷佛当真听着这种对话，吓怕起来了，一面锐声喊着她的祖父，一面从坎上跑向溪边渡口去。	Cuicui became as frightened as if she had really heard such a conversation. She shrilly called out for her grandpa, running from the ridge to the creek where the ferry landing was.
见到了祖父正把船拉在溪中心，船上人喁喁说着话，小小心子还依然跳跃不已。	When she saw Grandpa in midstream, tugging his ferryboat while the passengers talked softly on board, her little heart leaped up and down.
「爷爷，爷爷，你把船拉回来呀！」	"Grandfather, pull the boat back to this side!"
那老船夫不明白她的意思，还以为是翠翠要为他代劳了，就说：	The old ferryman didn't understand what was on her mind. Thinking she wanted to take over for him, he said,
「翠翠，等一等，我就回来！」	"Cuicui, wait a little, I'll be back over!"
「你不拉回来了吗？」	"Why aren't you coming back now?"
「我就回来！」	"I'm coming right away!"
翠翠坐在溪边，望着溪面为暮色所笼罩的一切，且望到那只渡船上一群过渡人，其中有个吸旱烟的打着火镰吸烟，且把烟杆在船边剥剥的敲着烟灰，就忽然哭起来了。	Cuicui sat by the stream bank, observing everything out on the creek, which was now enveloped by the dusk. She also looked at the crowd of passengers on the ferryboat, including one who knocked the ashes out of his long-stemmed tobacco pipe by striking it against the side of the boat before lighting it with a sickle-shaped steel striker. She suddenly began to cry.
祖父把船拉回来时，见翠翠痴痴的坐在岸边，问她是什么事，翠翠不作声。	When Grandpa pulled the boat back to shore, he saw Cuicui sitting on the stream bank, staring into space.  He asked what was the matter, but Cuicui didn't reply.
祖父要她去烧火煮饭，想了一会儿，觉得自己哭得可笑，一个人便回到屋中去，坐在黑黝黝的灶边把火烧燃后，她又走到门外高崖上去，喊叫她的祖父，要他回家里来，在职务上毫不儿戏的老船夫，因为明白过渡人皆是赶回城中吃晚饭的人，来一个就渡一个，不便要人站在那岸边呆等，故不上岸来。	Grandpa wanted her to light the fire and prepare supper.  After thinking about it, Cuicui felt foolish for having wept.  She went alone back into the house. She sat down in the pitch-black kitchen and lit the fire, then went back outside onto the high bluffs and called out for her grandpa to come home. But he did not come ashore.  The old ferryman was too serious about his job for that.  He knew that his passengers were all hurrying back to town for their meals.  He ferried them as they came, one by one if necessary, so they wouldn't have to wait alone on the riverbank.
只站在船头告翠翠，且让他做点事，把人渡完事后，就回家里来吃饭。	Standing in the prow of the boat, he told Cuicui to stop yelling at him, to let him do his job.  When he had got his passengers across, he would return home and eat supper.
翠翠第二次请求祖父，祖父不理会，她坐在悬崖上，很觉得悲伤。	Cuicui again begged Grandpa to come, but he paid no attention. She sat on the bluffs, feeling quite put out.
天夜了，有一匹大萤火虫尾上闪着蓝光，很迅速的从翠翠身旁飞过去，翠翠想，「看你飞得多远！」便把眼睛随着那萤火虫的明光追去。	It was now completely dark. Blue light shone from the tail of a big firefly that flew past Cuicui in a burst of speed. She thought, "Let's see how far you can fly!" She followed the light with her eyes.
杜鹃又叫了。	Cuckoos began to sing again.
「爷爷，为什么不上来？我要你！」	"Grandfather, why don't you come back? I want you here!"
在船上的祖父听到这种带着娇有点儿埋怨的声音，一面粗声粗气的答道：「翠翠，我就来，我就来！」一面心中却自言自语：「翠翠，爷爷不在了，你将怎么样？」	When Grandpa heard her sweetly pleading voice, which bore a measure of reproach, he answered her gruffly: "I'm coming, Cuicui, I'm coming." Meanwhile he mumbled, under his breath, "Cuicui, when your grandfather is gone, what will you do then?"
老船夫回到家中时，见家中还黑黝黝的，只灶间有火光，见翠翠坐在灶边矮条凳上，用手蒙着眼睛。	When the old ferryman returned home, the kitchen was completely dark, lit only by flames from the stove. Cuicui was sitting there on a low stool, her face in her hands.
走过去才晓得翠翠已哭了许久。	When he came closer, he realized that Cuicui had been crying for quite a while.
祖父一个下半天来，皆弯着个腰在船上拉来拉去，歇歇时手也酸了，腰也酸了，照规矩，一到家里就会嗅到锅中所焖瓜菜的味道，且可见到翠翠安排晚饭在灯光下跑来跑去的影子。	Usually when Grandpa came home, stooped from pulling the boat all day long, with sore hands and an aching back, he'd smell vegetables stewing in the wok and see Cuicui dashing about in the lamplight, preparing supper.
今天情形竟不同了一点。	Today was a little different.
祖父说：「翠翠，我来慢了，你就哭，这还成吗？我死了呢？」	Grandpa continued, "Cuicui, I came in late, but is that any reason to cry? What if I were dead?"
翠翠不作声。	Cuicui said nothing.
祖父又说：「不许哭，做一个大人，不管有什么事都不许哭。要硬扎一点，结实一点，才配活到这块土地上！」	Grandpa went on: "No more crying! Act like an adult. No crying, no matter what. You have to be a little tougher, a little stronger, to get through life on this earth!"
翠翠把手从眼睛边移开，靠近了祖父身边去，「我不哭了。」	Cuicui uncovered her eyes and cuddled up to Grandpa. "I've stopped crying."
两人吃饭时，祖父为翠翠说到一些有趣味的故事。	While the two made supper, Grandpa told Cuicui some interesting stories.
因此提到了死去了的翠翠的母亲。	This led to talk of Cuicui's deceased mother.
两人在豆油灯下把饭吃过后，老船夫因为工作疲倦，喝了半碗白酒，因此饭后兴致极好，又同翠翠到门外高崖上月光下去说故事。	After they'd finished their meal by the light of a soybean-oil lamp, the old ferryman, tired from his day of work, drank half a bowl of liquor.  This picked up his spirits.  He went outside with Cuicui and told her some more stories under the moonlight out on the bluffs.
说了些那个可怜母亲的乖巧处，同时且说到那可怜母亲性格强硬处，使翠翠听来神往倾心。	He told her about how lovely and good her poor mother had been, and also about her stubborn streak.  Cuicui found it wholly absorbing.
翠翠抱膝坐在月光下，傍着祖父身边，问了许多关于那个可怜母亲的故事。	Listening in the moonlight next to her grandpa, with her arms wrapped around her knees, Cuicui asked for more stories about her poor mother.
间或吁一口气，似乎心中压上了些份量沉重的东西，想挪移得远一点，才吁着这种气，可是却无从把那东西挪开。	Sometimes she would sigh, as if something heavy were weighing on her heart that she could move away with her breath.  And yet she had no way to relieve her anxiety.
月光如银子，无处不可照及，山上篁竹在月光下皆成为黑色。	The moonlight was silvery and it shone everywhere.  The bamboo stands in the mountains appeared black under the moon.
身边草丛中虫声繁密如落雨。	From the thickets of grass came the chirping of insects, thick as rain.
间或不知道从什么地方，忽然会有一只草莺「落落落落嘘！」啭着它的喉咙，不久之间，这小鸟儿又好像明白这是半夜，不应当那么吵闹，便仍然闭着那小小眼儿安睡了。	Occasionally, a warbler suddenly twittered from some hidden place, until the little bird seemed to realize that it was too late to be making noise and closed its eyes to go peacefully to sleep.
祖父夜来兴致很好，为翠翠把故事说下去，就提到了本城人二十年前唱歌的风气，如何驰名于川黔边地。	Feeling in good spirits this night, Grandpa kept telling Cuicui his stories.  He told of how the local people's songs, twenty years ago, were famous throughout the borderlands of Sichuan and Guizhou.
翠翠的父亲，便是唱歌的第一手，能用各种比喻解释爱与憎的结子，这些事也说到了。	Cuicui's father was the best singer of them all, able to summon up every kind of figure of speech to explain the travails of love and hate  he told her all about that, too.
翠翠母亲如何爱唱歌，且如何同父亲在未认识以前在白日里对歌，一个在半山上竹篁里砍竹子，一个在溪面渡船上拉船，这些事也说到了。	He also told her how her mother had loved to sing, how she and Cuicui's father had sung love songs to each other in broad daylight before they ever met, one while cutting bamboo on the mountain, the other while tugging the ferryboat across the stream.
翠翠问：「后来怎么样？」	Cuicui asked: "Then what happened?"
祖父说：「后来的事长得很，最重要的事情，就是这种歌唱出了你。」	Grandpa answered: "That would take a long time to tell. The important thing is that these songs gave us you." After that, Grandpa fell silent. He did not add, "The songs gave us you, and then they took away your father and mother."
第十四章	CHAPTER FOURTEEN
老船夫做事累了睡了，翠翠哭倦了也睡了。	Exhausted by his work, the old ferryman slept.  Cuicui, tired from crying, slept too.
翠翠不能忘记祖父所说的事情，梦中灵魂为一种美妙歌声浮起来了，彷佛轻轻的各处飘着，上了白塔，下了菜园，到了船上，又复飞窜过悬崖半腰－－去作什么呢？	She could not forget the things Grandpa had spoken of. In her dreams, her soul drifted up on the strains of beautiful songs, seeming gently to float all about, up to the white pagoda, down to the vegetable garden, onto the boat  then it flew back, midway up the hanging bluffs  but for what purpose?
摘虎耳草！白日里拉船时，她仰头望着崖上那些肥大虎耳草已极熟习。	To pick the "tigers' ears": saxifrage! While pulling the boat during the daylight hours, she looked up at those cliffs and became quite familiar with the huge saxifrage leaves there.
崖壁三五丈高，平时攀折不到手，这时节却可以选顶大的叶子作桑	The cliffs were thirty or fifty feet high, ordinarily too high to reach, but now she could pick the very biggest leaf and make an umbrella out of it.
一切皆像是祖父说的故事，翠翠只迷迷胡胡的躺在粗麻布帐子里草荐上，以为这梦做得顶美顶甜。	Everything was happening just as in Grandpa's stories.  Cuicui drifted off as she lay on a reed mat inside the burlap mosquito netting, taking pleasure in the beauty and sweetness of her dream.
祖父却在床上醒着，张起个耳朵听对溪高崖上的人唱了半夜的歌。	Grandpa, however, lay awake on his bed, straining his ears listening to late-night singing on the high cliffs across the stream.
他知道那是谁唱的，他知道是河街上天保大老走马路的第一着，又忧愁又快乐的听下去。	He knew who was singing: it was No. 1, Tianbao of River Street, making the horseman's move.  He listened, both troubled and excited.
翠翠因为日里哭倦了，睡得正好，他就不去惊动她。	Having worn herself out from crying during the day, Cuicui slept soundly, so Grandpa didn't disturb her.
第二天天一亮，翠翠就同祖父起身了，用溪水洗了脸，把早上说梦的忌讳去掉了，翠翠赶忙同祖父去说昨晚上所梦的事情。	Cuicui and Grandpa rose at dawn the next day and washed their faces in the creek to remove the taboo against telling one's dreams the morning after. Then Cuicui hastened to tell Grandpa what she had dreamed the night before.
「爷爷，你说唱歌，我昨天就在梦里听到一种顶好听的歌声，又软又缠绵，我像跟了这声音各处飞，飞到对溪悬崖半腰，摘了一大把虎耳草，得到了虎耳草，我可不知道把这个东西交给谁去了。	"Grandfather, you told me stories about singing, and yesterday I heard the most beautiful songs in my dreams, soft and sweet.  I felt I was able to fly in the air with these songs, to the face of the cliffs across the creek, where I picked a big saxifrage leaf.  But once I picked it, I don't know who I gave it to.
我睡得真好，梦的真有趣」	I slept wonderfully and dreamed magnificently!"
祖父温和悲悯的笑着，并不告给翠翠昨晚上的事实。	Grandpa smiled gently in sympathy, but did not tell Cuicui what had gone on the night before.
祖父心里想：「做梦一辈子更好，还有人在梦里作宰相中状元咧。」	He thought to himself: "If only you could dream on forever. Some people become the prime minister in their dreams."
昨晚上唱歌的，老船夫还以为是天保大老，日来便要翠翠守船，借故到城里去送药，探听情况。	The old ferryman still thought it was Tianbao, No. 1, who had sung the night before.  In recent days he had asked Cuicui to take charge of the ferry.  Pretending to be delivering some medicines in town, he set off to find out what River Street was up to.  There he ran into No. 1.
在河街见到了大老，就一把拉住那小伙子，很快乐的说：	He drew the young man aside, saying, cheerfully,
「大老，你这个人，又走车路又走马路，是怎样一个狡猾东西」	"No. 1, you dog, now you've tried both the chariot's move and the horseman's move. You're a sly one!"
但老船夫却作错了一件事情，把昨晚唱歌人「张冠李戴」了。	But the old ferryman was wrong  he had confused one brother with the other.
这两弟兄昨晚上同时到碧溪岨去，为了作哥哥的走车路占了先，无论如何也不肯先开腔唱歌，一定得让那弟弟先唱。	The night before, the two brothers had come to Green Creek Hill together. Because the elder brother had already made the first move, in the role of chariot, he insisted on letting his younger brother sing first this time.
弟弟一开口，哥哥却因为明知不是敌手，更不能开口了。	Realizing from the moment the latter raised his voice in song that he could never match him, No. 1 was more reluctant than ever to sing himself.
翠翠同她祖父晚上听到的歌声，便全是那个傩送二老所唱的。	The songs that Cuicui and her grandpa heard that night were all sung by No. 2, Nuosong.
大老伴弟弟回家时，就决定了同茶峒地方离开，驾家中那只新油船下驶，好忘却了上面的一切。	As No. 1 accompanied his younger brother home, he decided to leave Chadong and go downstream on the family's new oil boat, the better to forget what had happened.
这时正想下河去看新船装货。	Just now, No. 1 was thinking of going to the docks to see cargo loaded onto the new boat.
老船夫见他神情冷冷的，不明白他的意思，就用眉眼做了一个可笑的记号，表示他明白大老的冷淡是装成的，表示他有消息可以奉告。	Noting his cold expression, the old ferryman, misunderstanding, gave an amused wink to let on that he knew that No. 1's cold-shouldering was pretend, and also to show that he had good news to impart.
他拍了大老一下，轻轻的说：	He clapped No. 1 on the back and whispered, sticking his thumb up,
「你唱得很好，别人在梦里听着你那个歌，为那个歌带得很远，走了不少的路！	"You sang so well that someone heard your songs in her dreams. The songs carried her far, far away, on many journeys!
你是第一号，是我们地方唱歌第一号。」	You're the best, the very best singer around!"
大老望着弄渡船的老船夫涎皮的老脸，轻轻的说：	No. 1 stared back at the old boatman's unabashed expression and whispered:
「算了吧，你把宝贝女儿送给了会唱歌的竹雀吧。」	"Enough. You can keep your precious granddaughter for some songbird."
这句话使老船夫完全弄不明白它的意思。	The old ferryman had no idea what he meant by that.
大老从一个吊脚楼甬道走下河去了，老船夫也跟着下去。	No. 1 went down a path between the stilt houses to the river, with the ferryman following.
到了河边，见那只新船正在装货，许多油篓子搁到岸边。	At the river, numerous bamboo oil casks were on the bank, waiting to be laded onto the new boat.
一个水手正在用茅草扎成长束，备作船舷上挡浪用的茅把，还有人在河边用脂油擦桨板。	A boatman was twisting strands of cogongrass into sheaves to make bulwarks that would keep waves from washing over the deck.  Another man was sitting on a rock by the riverbank, greasing the oars with his hands.
老船夫问那个坐在大太阳下扎茅把的水手，这船什么日子下行，谁押船。	The old ferryman asked the boatman making the grass bundles when the boat would launch and who would pilot it.  The boatman pointed to No. 1.
那水手把手指着大老。老船夫搓着手说：	The old ferryman rubbed his hands and said:
「大老，听我说句正经话，你那件事走车路，不对；走马路，你有分的」	"No. 1, let me speak seriously, the chariot's move is not the right one for you. But you'll succeed with the horseman's move!"
那大老把手指着窗口说：「伯伯，你看那边，你要竹雀做孙女婿，竹雀在那里啊」	No. 1 pointed his finger at a window above and said: "Uncle, look up there. If you want a songbird for your grand-son-in-law, there he is!"
老船夫抬头望到二老，正在窗口整理一个鱼网。	The old ferryman looked up and saw No. 2, who was mending a fishnet by the window.
回碧溪岨到渡船上时，翠翠问：	When the ferryman reached the ferry at Green Creek Hill, Cuicui asked him:
「爷爷，你同谁吵了架，脸色那样难看」	"Grandfather, you've been quarrelling with someone. You look awful!"
祖父莞尔而笑，他到城里的事情，不告给翠翠一个字。	Grandpa smiled, but said nothing about his trip to town.
第十五章	CHAPTER FIFTEEN
大老坐了那只新油船向下河走去了，留下傩送二老在家。	No. 1 took the new oil boat downriver, leaving Nuosong behind at home.
老船夫方面还以为上次歌声既归二老唱的，在此后几个日子里，自然还会听到那种歌声。	The old ferryman thought that since No. 2 had sung the time before, he would sing again in the days to come.
一到了晚间就故意从别样事情上，促翠翠注意夜晚的歌声。	After nightfall he made a point of getting Cuicui to listen for songs in the night air.
两人吃完饭坐在屋里，因屋前滨水，长脚蚊子一到黄昏就嗡嗡的叫着，翠翠便把蒿艾束成的烟包点燃，向屋中角隅各处晃着驱逐蚊子。	The two of them sat indoors after supper.  Because their home fronted on the water, long-legged mosquitoes began buzzing at dusk.  Cuicui lit bundles of wormwood incense and shook them in every corner of the house to drive away the insects.
晃了一阵，估计全屋子里已为蒿艾烟气熏透了，才搁到床前地上去，再坐在小板凳上来听祖父说话。	After shaking them until she thought the whole house was thoroughly smoked, she put some on the floor in front of her bed before sitting on a little wooden stool to listen to Grandpa tell his stories.
从一些故事上慢慢的谈到了唱歌，祖父话说得很妙。	The subject finally turned to singing, about which Grandpa was quite eloquent.
祖父到后发问道：	Finally, he asked Cuicui, jokingly:
「翠翠，梦里的歌可以使你爬上高崖去摘那虎耳草，若当真有谁来在对溪高崖上为你唱歌，你怎么样？」祖父把话当笑话说着的。	"Cuicui, the songs in your dream lifted you up the cliffs to pick saxifrage; if someone really sang to you from the cliffs across the stream, what would you do?"
翠翠便也当笑话答道：「有人唱歌我就听下去，他唱多久我也听多久！」	Cuicui answered him in a similarly humorous vein: "I'd listen to him, for as long as he could sing!"
「唱三年六个月呢？」	"What if he sang for three years and six months?"
「唱得好听，我听三年六个月。」	"If his voice was good, I'd listen for three years and six months."
「这不公平吧。」	"That's not fair."
「怎么不公平？为我唱歌的人，不是极愿意我长远听他的歌吗？」	"Why not? Wouldn't he want me to listen to him for a long time?"
「照理说：炒菜要人吃，唱歌要人听。	"They say that when you cook food, you want someone to eat it, and when you sing, you want someone to listen.
可是人家为你唱，是要你懂他歌里的意思！」	But if a person sings to you, it's because he wants you to understand the meaning of the lyrics!"
「爷爷，懂歌里什么意思？」	"Grandfather, what meaning?"
「自然是他那颗想同你要好的真心！不懂那点心事，不是同听竹雀唱歌一样了吗？」	"His true heart, of course, which wants your affection! If you don't grasp what's in his heart, would it be any better than listening to a songbird?"
「我懂了他的心又怎么样？」	"And what if I did happen to understand what's in his heart?"
祖父用拳头把自己腿重重的捶着，且笑着：「翠翠，你人乖，爷爷笨得很，话也不说得温柔，莫生气。	Grandpa slapped his thigh and laughed: "Cuicui, you're a smart girl and your grandfather is plain stupid. If I speak a little too bluntly, don't get mad at me.
我信口开河，说个笑话给你听。	I'll throw caution to the wind and tell you a funny story.
你应当当笑话听。河街天保大老走车路，请保山来提亲，我告给过你这件事了，你那神气不愿意，是不是？	No. 1, Tianbao of River Street, made the chariot's move; he had a go-between propose matrimony.  When I told you about it, you didn't seem too willing, am I right?
可是，假若那个人还有个兄弟，走马路，为你来唱歌，向你求婚，你将怎么说？」	But if he had a younger brother who adopted the horseman's move and sang to you to win your heart, what would you say to that?"
翠翠吃了一惊，低下头去。	Startled, Cuicui lowered her head.
因为她不明白这笑话有几分真，又不清楚这笑话是谁诌的。	She didn't know how much of this story might be real, or who made it up.
祖父说：「你告诉我，愿意哪一个？」	Grandpa said: "See if you can come up with an answer  which one do you prefer?"
翠翠便微笑着轻轻的带点儿恳求的神气说：	Forcing herself to smile, Cuicui replied softly, and somewhat pleadingly:
「爷爷莫说这个笑话吧。」翠翠站起身了。	"Grandfather, no more of your humor." She stood up.
「我说的若是真话呢？」	"Suppose it were not just a story but the truth?"
「爷爷你真是个－－」翠翠说着走出去了。	"Grandfather!" Cuicui walked away as she answered.
祖父说：「我说的是笑话，你生我的气吗？」	Grandpa said: "It was in jest! Are you angry at me?"
翠翠不敢生祖父的气，走近门限边时，就把话引到另外一件事情上去：「爷爷看天上的月亮，那么大！」说着，出了屋外，便在那一派清光的露天中站定。站了一忽儿，祖父也从屋中出到外边来了。	Cuicui could hardly be angry at him.  When she got to the door, she turned the conversation toward something else: "Look how big the moon is, Grandfather!" She went outside and stood still in the bright and open air. After a time, Grandpa came outside to join her.
翠翠于是坐到那白日里为强烈阳光晒热的岩石上去，石头正散发日间所储的余热。	Cuicui sat down on the great boulder  warmed by the hot sun during the day, it was radiating its spare heat now.
祖父就说：「翠翠，莫坐热石头，免得生坐板疮。」但自己用手摸摸后，自己便也坐到那岩石上了。	Grandpa said, "Cuicui, don't sit on the hot boulder or you'll get blisters." But after feeling the rock, he sat down on the crag, too.
月光极其柔和，溪面浮着一层薄薄白雾，这时节对溪若有人唱歌，隔溪应和，实在太美丽了。	The moonlight was very gentle and a thin white mist floated on top of the stream.  It would have been the perfect time for someone to sing from across the creek, and to be answered from the other side.
翠翠还记着先前祖父说的笑话。	Cuicui thought about the funny story her grandpa had told her.
耳朵又不聋，祖父的话说得极分明，一个兄弟走马路，唱歌来打发这样的晚上，算是怎么回事？	She was not deaf, and Grandpa had made his meaning quite clear.  What did it mean if one of the brothers made the horseman's move and spent a night like this singing to her?
她似乎为了等着这样的歌声，沉默了许久。	She remained silent for a long time, as if waiting to hear such songs.
她在月光下坐了一阵，心里却当真愿意听一个人来唱歌。	She sat there under the moonlight; she really wanted to be sung to.
久之，对溪除了一片草虫的清音复奏以外别无所有。	In the end, no sound came from the opposite bank other than the light drone of field insects.
翠翠走回家里去，在房门边摸着了那个芦管，拿出来在月光下自己吹着。	Cuicui went into the house and groped in the darkness for the luguan reed pipe.  She brought it back out into the moonlight and began blowing on it.
觉吹得不好，又递给祖父要祖父吹。	Feeling that her playing was not very good, she passed it to Grandpa.
老船夫把那个芦管竖在嘴边，吹了个长长的曲子，翠翠的心被吹柔软了。	The old ferryman put it to his lips and played a long tune that softened Cuicui's heart.
翠翠依傍祖父坐着，问祖父：	She sat beside her grandpa and asked:
「爷爷，谁是第一个做这个小管子的人？」	"Grandfather, who invented this little musical instrument?"
「一定是个最快乐的人，因为他分给人的也是许多快乐；可又像是个最不快乐的人作的，因为他同时也可以引起人不快乐！」	"It must have been the happiest person on earth, because happiness is what it gives; yet perhaps the world's unhappiest person, too, because it also makes people unhappy!"
「爷爷，你不快乐了吗？生我的气了吗？」	"Grandfather, are you unhappy? Are you angry at me?"
「我不生你的气。你在我身边，我很快乐。」	"Not at all. Having you by my side makes me very happy."
「我万一跑了呢？」	"What if I ran away?"
「你不会离开爷爷的。」	"You wouldn't leave your grandfather."
「万一有这种事，爷爷你怎么样？」	"But just suppose I did. What would you do?"
「万一有这种事，我就驾了这只渡船去找你。」	"In the remote event that you did, I'd go looking for you in this ferryboat."
翠翠嗤的笑了。	That brought a chortle from Cuicui.
「凤滩、茨滩不为凶，下面还有绕鸡笼；绕鸡笼也容易下，青浪滩浪如屋大。	Phoenix Rapids, Puncture Vine Rapids, aren't the worst to rage, Just go downstream and there is still the Twirling Chicken Cage; But Twirling Chicken Cage yet lacks the most ferocious foam, The waves at Green Foam Rapids are big as any home.
爷爷，你渡船也能下凤滩、茨滩、青浪滩吗？那些地方的水，你不说过像疯子吗？」	"Grandfather, could your ferryboat make it through all those rapids on the River Yuan? Didn't you say that the river in those places is like a madman, simply unwilling to listen to reason?"
祖父说：「翠翠，我到那时可真像疯子，还怕大水大浪？」	Grandpa said, "Cuicui, by the time I got there I'd be a madman myself. What would I have to fear from broad rivers and giant waves?"
翠翠俨然极认真的想了一下，就说：「爷爷，我一定不走。可是，你会不会走？你会不会被一个人抓到别处去？」	Cuicui thought it over a little, seemingly in earnest, then said: "Grandfather, I wouldn't leave. But would you? Might someone carry you off?"
祖父不作声了，他想到被死亡抓走那一类事情。	Grandpa didn't answer. He felt that he had nothing to fear from the law and the officials. Death was the one thing that might take him.
老船夫打量着自己被死亡抓走以后的情形，痴痴的看望天南角上一颗星子，心想：「七月八月天上方有流星，人也会在七月八月死去吧？」	The old ferryman got to thinking about what would happen when death carried him away.  Staring blankly at a star in the southern sky, he thought: "Shooting stars come only in the seventh and eighth months of the year. Might my death come then, too?"
又想起白日在河街上同大老谈话的经过，想其中寨人陪嫁的那座碾坊，想起二老，想起一大堆事情，心中有点儿乱。	He also thought about his conversation with No. 1 on River Street that day, about the mill that was to be the dowry of the girl from Middle Stockade, and about No. 2  about a lot of things. He felt a little uneasy at heart.
翠翠忽然说：「爷爷，你唱个歌给我听听，好不好？」	Suddenly, Cuicui asked: "Grandfather, won't you sing a song for me, please?"
祖父唱了十个歌，翠翠傍在祖父身边，闭着眼睛听下去，等到祖父不作声时，翠翠自言自语说：「我又摘了一把虎耳草了。」	Grandpa sang ten songs.  Cuicui listened by his side, her eyes closed. When he finished, she said to herself: "I've picked saxifrage again."
祖父所唱的歌便是那晚上听来的歌。	The songs Grandpa sang for her were the very songs they heard the night of her dream.
第十六章	CHAPTER SIXTEEN
二老有机会唱歌却从此不再到碧溪岨唱歌。	No. 2 now had his chance to serenade, but he never came to Green Creek Hill to sing again.
十五过去了，十六也过去了，到了十七，老船夫忍不住了，进城往河街去找寻那个年青小伙子，到城门边正预备入河街时，就遇着上次为大老作保山的杨马兵，正牵了一匹骡马预备出城，一见老船夫，就拉住了他：	The fifteenth passed, the sixteenth, then the seventeenth.  Unable to bear the wait any longer, the old ferryman went to town and looked for the young fellow on River Street.  When he got to the gate in the city wall and was about to enter River Street, he met Horseman Yang, who had been No. 1's matchmaker.  He was heading out of town, leading a mule, when he saw the old ferryman and took him aside:
「伯伯，我正有事情告你，碰巧你就来城里」	"Uncle, here you are come to town, just when I had something to discuss with you!"
「什么事？」	"What?"
「天保大老坐下水船到茨滩出了事，闪不知这个人掉到滩下漩水里就淹坏了。早上顺顺家里得到这个信，听说二老一早就赶去了。」	"That boat Tianbao took downstream was wrecked in the Puncture Vine Rapids. He fell into a whirlpool and drowned. Shunshun's family got the news this morning. I hear that No. 2 set off for the place at once."
这消息同有力巴掌一样重重的掴了他那么一下，他不相信这是当真的消息。	This bad news stung the old ferryman like a heavy slap in the face.  He couldn't believe it.
他故作从容的说：	Feigning calm, he said,
「天保大老淹坏了吗？从不听说有水鸭子被水淹坏的」	"No. 1, drowned? Since when does a duck drown in water?"
「可是那只水鸭子仍然有那么一次被淹坏了－－我赞成你的卓见，不让那小子走车路十分顺手。」	"But that's just what happened to this duck  I salute your wisdom in not letting that young fellow have your granddaughter so easily, by the chariot's move."
从马兵言语上，老船夫还十分怀疑这个新闻，但从马兵神气上注意，老船夫却看清楚这是个真的消息了。	The horse-soldier's words were not enough to still the old ferryman's doubts about the news, but he could clearly see from his expression that this was completely real.
他惨惨的说：	He said, grimly,
「我有什么卓见可言？这是天意！一切都有天意－－」老船夫说时心中充满了感情。	"What wisdom? This is the doing of Heaven! Everything is according to Heaven's will  " As he spoke, the old ferryman choked up.
特为证明那马兵所说的话有多少可靠处，老船夫同马兵分手后，于是匆匆赶到河街上去。	To confirm the reliability of the horse-soldier's news, the old ferryman took leave of him and hurried over to River Street.
到了顺顺家门前，正有人烧纸钱，许多人围在一处说话。	People were burning paper spirit money in front of Shunshun's house.  A crowd had gathered.
走近去听听，所说的便是杨马兵提到的那件事。	Pressing in among them, the ferryman heard them talking about the tragedy of which Horseman Yang had spoken.
但一到有人发现了身后的老船夫时，大家便把话语转了方向，故意来谈下河油价涨落情形了。	Yet, as soon as they discovered that the old ferryman was listening in, they all changed the subject, unnaturally, to the price of oil in downstream markets.
老船夫心中很不安，正想找一个比较要好的水手谈谈。	Nervous and worried, the old ferryman looked around for a boatman with whom he could talk on friendlier terms.
一会船总顺顺从外面回来了，样子沉沉的，这豪爽正直的中年人，正似乎为不幸打倒努力想挣扎爬起的神气，一见到老船夫就说：	A short while later, Fleetmaster Shunshun arrived home, wholly dejected. This honest middle-aged man, ordinarily bold and gregarious, seemed beaten down by his misfortune. Struggling to go forward, he said, as soon as he saw the old ferryman:
「老伯伯，我们谈的那件事情吹了吧。天保大老已经坏了，你知道了吧？」	"Elder Uncle, that plan of ours has fallen through. Tianbao has met his end. Have you heard?"
老船夫两只眼睛红红的，把手搓着，「怎么的，这是真事！是昨天，是前天？」	His eyes red, the old ferryman wrung his hands: "What, so it's true? It can't be! Did it happen yesterday or the day before?"
另一个像是赶路同来报信的，插嘴说道：「十六中上，船搁到石包子上，船头进了水，大老想把篙撇着，人就弹到水中去了。」	Another man broke in, who appeared to be just back with the news: "The morning of the sixteenth, the boat got stuck on a reef and water came pouring over the bow. No. 1 was flipped into the water while trying to pole the boat free."
老船夫说：「你眼见他下水吗？」	The old ferryman asked: "Did you see him fall into the water?"
「我还与他同时下水」	"I fell in with him!"
「他说什么？」	"What did he say?"
「什么都来不及说！这几天来他都不说话」	"He had no time to speak! During the whole trip, he didn't say a word!"
老船夫把头摇摇，向顺顺那么怯怯的溜了一眼。	The old ferryman shook his head and timidly looked at Shunshun.
船总顺顺像知道他心中不安处，就说：「伯伯，一切是天，算了吧。我这里有大兴场人送来的好烧酒，你拿一点去喝罢。」	As if aware of his unease, Fleetmaster Shunshun said, "Uncle, it's all Heaven's doing. That's all there is to it. Someone from Daxingchang has given me a gift of fine wine. Take some home with you."
一个伙计用竹筒上了一筒酒，用新桐木叶蒙着筒口，交给了老船夫。	One of the lads brought a bamboo tube full of wine and covered it with a fresh tung-tree leaf. He gave it to the old ferryman.
老船夫把酒拿走，到了河街后，低头向河码头走去，到河边天保大前天上船处去看看。	Taking the wine, the old ferryman went out onto River Street, then bowed his head and walked toward the wharves to find the place where Tianbao had boarded his boat three days before.
杨马兵还在那里放马到沙地上打滚，自己坐在柳树荫下乘凉。	Horseman Yang was already there, keeping cool in the shade of a willow tree while letting his horse roll around on the sandy shore.
老船夫就走过去请马兵试试那大兴场的烧酒，两人喝了点酒后，兴致似乎皆好些了，老船夫就告给杨马兵，十四夜里二老过碧溪岨唱歌那件事情。	The old ferryman walked over and asked him to taste the wine from Daxingchang.  After a few swallows, when they were in better spirits, the ferryman told Horseman Yang how on the night of the fourteenth the two brothers had come to Green Creek Hill to sing.
那马兵听到后便说：	When Horseman Yang heard this, he said,
「伯伯，你是不是以为翠翠愿意二老应该派归二老－－」	"Uncle, don't you think Cuicui ought to go to No. 2, since she's willing  "
话没说完，傩送二老却从河街下来了。	He hadn't even finished his sentence when Nuosong, No. 2 himself, came down to the river.
这年青人正像要远行的样子，一见了老船夫就回头走去。	The young man looked as if he were about to go on a long trip.  Catching sight of the old ferryman, he averted his gaze and went the other way.
杨马兵就喊他说：「二老，二老，你来，有话同你说呀」	Horseman Yang called out to him, "No. 2, No. 2, over here, I'd like to talk to you!"
二老站定了，很不高兴神气，问马兵「有什么话说」。	No. 2 halted. Irritated, he asked the horseman, "What is it?"
马兵望望老船夫，就向二老说：「你来，有话说」	The horseman looked at the old ferryman, then said to No. 2, "Come here, I've got something to say!"
「什么话？」	"What?"
「我听人说你已经走了－－你过来我同你说，我不会吃掉你」	"I'd heard you'd already gone  come over here so we can talk, I won't bite you! When are you leaving?"
那黑脸宽肩膊，样子虎虎有生气的傩送二老，勉强笑着，到了柳荫下时，老船夫想把空气缓和下来，指着河上游远处那座新碾坊说：「二老，听人说那碾坊将来是归你的！归了你，派我来守碾子，行不行？」	Nuosong, dark-faced, broad-shouldered, and full of life and energy, forced a smile and came over under the willow. Wanting to clear the air, the old ferryman pointed toward the new mill far upriver and said, "No. 2, I hear that mill will be yours in the future! When it is, what say you let me run it for you?"
二老彷佛听不惯这个询问的用意，便不作声。	As if irritated by what the old ferryman was driving at, No. 2 remained silent.
杨马兵看风头有点儿僵，便说：「二老，你怎么的，预备下去吗？」那年青人把头点点，不再说什么，就走开了。	Horseman Yang, seeing that they were headed toward an impasse, put in: "No. 2, how goes it, are you ready to set sail?" The young man nodded. He left without another word.
老船夫讨了个没趣，很懊恼的赶回碧溪岨去，到了渡船上时，就装作把事情看得极随便似的，告给翠翠。	Realizing that he had brought about his own humiliation, the old ferryman returned to Green Creek Hill feeling very upset. When he reached the ferry, he pretended to have taken it all in stride as he told Cuicui:
「翠翠，今天城里出了件新鲜事情，天保大老驾油船下辰州，运气不好，掉到茨滩淹坏了。」	"Cuicui, news has come from the city today. Tianbao, No. 1, took his oil boat downstream to Chenzhou and ran into some bad luck. He met his end in the Puncture Vine Rapids."
翠翠因为听不懂，对于这个报告最先好像全不在意。	Not having understood his meaning, Cuicui at first seemed not to take Grandpa's report too seriously.
祖父又说：	So he added:
「翠翠，这是真事。上次来到这里做保山的杨马兵，还说我早不答应亲事，极有见识」	"It's true, Cuicui. Horseman Yang, who came here the time before as a matchmaker, even said that by not giving you away too soon, I showed a lot of foresight!"
翠翠瞥了祖父一眼，见他眼睛红红的，知道他喝了酒，且有了点事情不高兴，心中想：「谁撩你生气？」	A quick glance at Grandpa told Cuicui that his eyes were red.  She knew he'd been drinking and also that something was troubling him. She thought, "Who got you so angry?"
船到家边时，祖父不自然的笑着向家中走去。	When the ferryboat reached the home side, Grandpa laughed unnaturally and went toward the house.
翠翠守船，半天不闻祖父声息，赶回家去看看，见祖父正坐在门坎上编草鞋耳子。	Cuicui remained in the boat. Hearing nothing from Grandpa for a very long time, she headed home herself to have a look.  She saw Grandpa sitting on the doorstep, plaiting straw sandals.
翠翠见祖父神气极不对，就蹲到他身前去。	She could tell that Grandpa was not himself. She knelt in front of him.
「爷爷，你怎么的？」	"Grandfather, what's bothering you?"
「天保当真死了！二老生了我们的气，以为他家中出这件事情，是我们分派的」	"Tianbao is dead, don't you see. No. 2 is angry at us. He thinks we caused all this."
有人在溪边大声喊渡船过渡，祖父匆匆出去了。	Someone at the stream hailed the ferry, so Grandpa hurried on out.
翠翠坐在那屋角隅稻草上，心中极乱，等等还不见祖父回来，就哭起来了。	Cuicui sat on a pile of rice straw in the corner of the house, greatly upset.  When Grandpa didn't return, she began to cry.
第十七章	CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
祖父似乎生谁的气，脸上笑容减少了，对于翠翠方面也不大注意了。	Grandpa seemed angry at someone.  He didn't smile as much as before, and he didn't pay much attention to Cuicui.
翠翠像知道祖父已不很疼她，但又像不明白它的原因。	She began to realize that Grandpa was not doting on her as usual, yet she seemed not to understand the real reason for it.
但这并不是很久的事，日子一过去，也就好了。	But this didn't last very long.  Things got better as the days passed.
两人仍然划船过日子，一切依旧，惟对于生活，却彷佛什么地方有了个看不见的缺口，始终无法填补起来。	The pair still spent their days on the ferryboat just as always, except that there seemed to be some invisible absence in their lives that simply could not be filled.
祖父过河街去仍然可以得到船总顺顺的款待，但很明显的事，那船总却并不忘掉死去者死亡的原因。	When Grandpa went to River Street, Fleetmaster Shunshun still entertained him as before, yet it was quite apparent that the fleetmaster could never forget why his deceased son had come to be deceased.
二老出北河下辰州走了六百里，沿河找寻那个可怜哥哥的尸骸，毫无结果，在各处税关上贴下招字，返回茶峒来了。	No. 2 had ventured two hundred miles down the White River to Chenzhou, searching for the corpse of his elder brother all along the way.  It was in vain.  After posting notices at all the customs stations, he returned to Chadong.
过不久，他又过川东去办货，过渡时见到老船夫。	Not long after, on his way to transport goods to East Sichuan, he came upon the old ferryman at the crossing.
老船夫看看那小伙子，好像已完全忘掉了从前的事情，就同他说话。	Observing that the young man seemed to have forgotten what had gone before, the old ferryman said to him,
「二老，大六月日头毒人，你又上川东去，不怕辛苦？」	"No. 2, traveling in the heat of the sixth month is terribly punishing, yet here you are on your way to East Sichuan again. I guess you can stand any hardship!"
「要饭吃，头上是火也得上路！」	"We have to eat. I'd have to be on my way even if the heavens above were on fire!"
「要吃饭！二老家还少饭吃！」	"Eat? Don't tell me that's a problem in No. 2's family!"
「有饭吃，爹爹说年青人也不应该在家中白吃不作事！」	"Oh, we have what we need, but Father says that young men ought not to stay home and eat without earning their keep!"
「你爹爹好吗？」	"How is your father these days?"
「吃得做得，有什么不好。」	"He eats and works, as before. Why do you ask?"
「你哥哥坏了，我看你爹爹为这件事情也好像萎悴多了！」二老听到这句话，不作声了，眼睛望着老船夫屋后那个白塔。他似乎想起了过去那个晚上那件旧事，心中十分惆怅。	"Ever since your elder brother's misfortune, the tragedy seems to me to have dealt your father a heavy blow!" No. 2 was silent. He gazed at the white pagoda behind the old ferryman's house, as if recalling, wholly disconsolate, that night from the time before and the events that went with it.
老船夫怯怯的望了年青人一眼，一个微笑在脸上漾开。	The old ferryman stole a fearful glance at the young man and broke out in a smile.
「二老，我家翠翠说，五月里有天晚上，做了个梦－－」说时他又望望二老，见二老并不惊讶，也不厌烦，于是又接着说，「她梦得古怪，说在梦中被一个人的歌声浮起来，上悬岩摘了一把虎耳草！」	"No. 2, my Cuicui tells me that one night during the last month she had a dream  " Watching No. 2 as he spoke, he saw neither shock nor irritation, so he went on: "It was strange. She said that in her dream someone's songs floated her up to the bluffs across the creek, where she picked a handful of saxifrage!"
二老把头偏过一旁去作了一个苦笑，心中想到「老头子倒会做作」。	No. 2 tilted his head and made a wry smile, thinking to himself, "This old codger is up to something."
这点意思在那个苦笑上，彷佛同样泄露出来，仍然被老船夫看到了，老船夫就说：「二老，你不信吗？」	His suspicion was revealed in his smile and noted by the old ferryman, who continued, evidently flustered, "No. 2, don't you believe me?"
那年青人说：「我怎么不相信？因为我做傻子在那边岩上唱过一晚的歌！」	The young man replied: "Why wouldn't I believe you? I was a fool to sing all night long from the top of those cliffs!"
老船夫被一句料想不到的老实话窘住了，口中结结巴巴的说：「这是真的－－这是假的－－」	Shocked and humiliated by this unexpected bluntness, the ferryman stammered: "Really?  Surely not  "
「怎么不是真的？天保大老的死，难道不是真的！」	"Oh no? What about the death of Tianbao? Isn't that real?"
「可是，可是－－」	"But, but  "
老船夫的做作处，原意只是想把事情弄明白一点，但一起始自己叙述这段事情时，方法上就有了错处，因此反被二老误会了。	The old ferryman's pretenses had originally been aimed only at clarifying the situation a little, but from the start he sensed that he had done the wrong thing and been misunderstood.
他这时正想把那夜的情形好好说出来，船已到了岸边。	He wanted now to give a complete explanation of the events of that night, but the boat had reached the other bank.
二老一跃上了岸，就想走去。	No. 2 wanted to be on his way as soon as he jumped to shore.
老船夫在船上显得更加忙乱的样子说：	The old ferryman shouted to him from the boat, all the more flustered:
「二老，二老，你等等，我有话同你说，你先前不是说到那个－－你做傻子的事情吗？你并不傻，别人才当真叫你那歌弄成傻相！」	"No. 2, No. 2, wait up, I have something to tell you. You know that part about you being a fool? You were no fool  it was your counterpart who went into a foolish rapture because of your songs!"
那年青人虽站定了，口中却轻轻的说：「得了够了，不要说了。」	The young man paused a moment, but he said, softly: "That's it. Enough of this. Don't talk about it anymore."
老船夫说：「二老，我听人说你不要碾子要渡船，这是杨马兵说的，不是真的吧？」	The old ferryman continued, "No. 2, I heard that you'd rather tend a ferryboat than a grain mill. Horseman Yang told me so. Was he right?"
那年青人说：「要渡船又怎样？」	The young man said, "And what if I did want the ferryboat?"
老船夫看看二老的神气，心中忽然高兴起来了，就情不自禁的高声叫着翠翠，要她下溪边来。	Suddenly cheered by the look on No. 2's face, the old ferryman couldn't resist loudly shouting for Cuicui to come down to the stream.
可是，不知翠翠是故意不从屋里出来，还是到别处去了，许久还不见到翠翠的影子，也不闻这个女孩子的声音。	But luck was not with him.  He waited a long while and still there was no sign of her, and no response.  She had either gone off or was purposely staying inside the house.
二老等了一会，看看老船夫那副神气，一句话不说，便微笑着，大踏步同一个挑担粉条白糖货物的脚夫走去了。	No. 2 waited for a while in silence, watching the expression on the old ferryman's face, before smiling and striding off with a porter who was bearing loads of bean starch noodles and refined sugar.
过了碧溪岨小山，两人应沿着一条曲曲折折的竹林走去，那个脚夫这时节开了口：	Once they passed the low mountain called Green Creek Hill, the two took a winding path that skirted a bamboo grove. The porter spoke what was on his mind:
「傩送二老，看那弄渡船的神气，很欢喜你！」	"Nuosong, I can tell from his look that this ferryman has really taken a liking to you!"
二老不作声，那人就又说道：	When No. 2 didn't answer, the man said:
「二老，他问你要碾坊还是要渡船，你当真预备做他的孙女婿，接替他那只渡船吗？」	"No. 2, he asked if you preferred the mill or the ferry. Are you really going to marry his granddaughter and take over his beat-up ferryboat?"
二老笑了，那人又说：	No. 2 laughed. The other man went on:
「二老，若这件事派给我，我要那座碾坊。一座碾坊的出息，每天可收七升米，三斗糠。」	"No. 2, if it were my choice, I'd take the grain mill. There's a future in that. It'll make you three pints of rice and ten times that in bran."
二老说：「我回来时向我爹爹去说，为你向中寨人做媒，让你得到那座碾坊吧。	No. 2 responded: "When I get back, I'll put in a word for you with my father. He can make you a match with those people in Middle Stockade, so you can have your mill.
至于我呢，我想弄渡船是很好的。	As for me, I'd be fine with that ferryboat.
只是老家伙为人弯弯曲曲，不利索，大老是他弄死的。」	But the old man is too cunning by far. He's the one who led No. 1 to his demise."
老船夫见二老那么走去了，翠翠还不出来，心中很不快乐。	The old ferryman was disconsolate to see No. 2 go on his way.  Still Cuicui had not come out.
走回家去看看，原来翠翠并不在家。	He went to the house for a look and Cuicui was not there.
过一会，翠翠提了个篮子从小山后回来了，方知道大清早翠翠已出门掘竹鞭笋去了。	A while later, Cuicui emerged from behind a hill, carrying a basket.  He realized that Cuicui had been out all morning, digging up bamboo shoots.
「翠翠，我喊了你好久，你不听到！」	"Cuicui, I called for you for the longest time! You must not have heard."
「喊我做什么？」	"What did you call me for?"
「一个过渡－－一个熟人，我们谈起你－－我喊你你可不答应！」	"There was a passenger on the ferry  someone we know. We got to talking about you. I called you, but you didn't answer!"
「是谁？」	"Who was it?"
「你猜，翠翠。不是陌生人－－你认识他！」	"Guess, Cuicui. He wasn't a stranger, you know him!"
翠翠想起适间从竹林里无意中听来的话，脸红了，半天不说话。	Cuicui thought of the conversation she had inadvertently heard while in the bamboo grove just before. She blushed and for a long time remained quiet.
老船夫问：「翠翠，你得了多少鞭笋？」	The old ferryman asked, "Cuicui, how many bamboo shoots did you gather?"
翠翠把竹篮向地下一倒，除了十来根小小鞭笋外，只是一大把虎耳草。	Cuicui turned her bamboo basket upside down. Besides a dozen or so little bamboo shoots, there was a big clump of saxifrage.
老船夫望了翠翠一眼，翠翠两颊绯红跑了。	The old ferryman shot her a glance. Her cheeks flushing scarlet, Cuicui hurried away.
第十八章	CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
日子平平的过了一个月，一切人心上的病痛，似乎皆在那份长长的白日下医治好了。	As another month passed quietly by, the heartaches of all concerned seemed cured by the long summer days.
天气特别热，各人只忙着流汗，用凉水淘江米酒吃，不用什么心事，心事在人生活中，也就留不住了。	The weather grew so hot that everyone was preoccupied with their sweating and they ate their fermented glutinous rice in cold water.  There was no place left in their lives for heartaches and worries.
翠翠每天皆到白塔下背太阳的一面去午睡，高处既极凉快，两山竹篁里叫得使人发松的竹雀和其它鸟类又如此之多，致使她在睡梦里尽为山鸟歌声所浮着，做的梦也便常是顶荒唐的梦。	Every afternoon, Cuicui took a nap on the shady side of the pagoda.  It was very cool on that elevated spot.  The soothing songs of bamboo finches and other birds came from the bamboo stands of the mountains on either side. The birds were such a numerous flock that in her dreams the mountain birdsong lifted her up into the air and brought her the most fantastic dreams.
这并不是人的罪过。	There was no sin in that.
诗人们会在一件小事上写出整本整部的诗，雕刻家在一块石头上雕得出骨血如生的人像，画家一撇儿绿，一撇儿红，一撇儿灰，画得出一幅一幅带有魔力的彩画，谁不是为了惦着一个微笑的影子，或是一个皱眉的记号，方弄出那么些古怪成绩？	Poets could spin out books of poetry from a small incident.  Sculptors could carve the living image of a person in a piece of stone, and painters could turn out one magical painting after another from streaks of green, red, and gray.  Who among them was not inspired by the memory of a smile, or a frown?
翠翠不能用文字，不能用石头，不能用颜色把那点心头上的爱憎移到别一件东西上去，却只让她的心，在一切顶荒唐事情上驰骋。	Cuicui could not use writing, or stone, or colors, to transfer her heart's passions of love and hate into a work of art, she could only let her heart race ahead with the most absurd thoughts.
她从这分隐秘里，常常得到又惊又喜的兴奋。	This secretiveness often brought her an excitement both shocking and elating.
一点儿不可知的未来，摇撼她的情感极厉害，她无从完全把那种痴处不让祖父知道。	A wholly unknowable future was shaking her emotions to their foundations, and she could not completely hide these passions from her grandpa.
祖父呢，可以说一切都知道了的。但事实上他又却是个一无所知的人。	As to Grandpa, one could say that he knew everything, but in fact he was wholly ignorant.
他明白翠翠不讨厌那个二老，却不明白那小伙子二老怎么样。	He understood that Cuicui was not displeased with the No. 2 son, but he could not comprehend the young man's own disposition.
他从船总处与二老处，皆碰过了钉子，但他并不灰心。	He had met with rebuffs from both the fleetmaster and No. 2, yet he failed to be discouraged.
「要安排得对一点，方合道理，一切有个命」他那么想着，就更显得好事多磨起来了。睁着眼睛时，他做的梦比那个外孙女翠翠便更荒唐更寥阔。	"If I can fix things up a little better, it will turn out all right, if only fate allows!" In that frame of mind, he mused that the course of love was never easy. The visions he dreamed with his eyes wide open were even more fantastic and unfettered than those of his granddaughter, Cuicui.
他向各个过渡本地人打听二老父子的生活，关切他们如同自己家中人一样。	He inquired about the lives of No. 2 and his father from every local person who took his ferry, as solicitous about the River Street people as if they were family.
但也古怪，因此他却怕见到那个船总同二老了。	Yet, strangely enough, this made him all the more fearful of actually running into them.
一见他们他就不知说些什么，只是老脾气把两只手搓来搓去，从容处完全失去了。	When he did, he couldn't think of a thing to say.  He rubbed his hands together nervously, as was his habit, having completely lost his composure.
二老父子方面皆明白他的意思，但那个死去的人，却用一个凄凉的印象，镶嵌到父子心中，两人便对于老船夫的意思，俨然全不明白似的，一同把日子打发下去。	No. 2 and his father knew what he was up to, but the departed son, to use a cold expression, was chiseled into their hearts.  They went about their business as the days passed by, acting as if they didn't know what the old ferryman was about.
明明白白夜来并不作梦，早晨同翠翠说话时，那作祖父的会说：	Early in the morning, when it was obvious that he had not dreamed a single dream the night before, Grandpa would say,
「翠翠，翠翠，我昨晚上做了个好不怕人的梦」	"Cuicui, Cuicui, last night I had a simply awful dream."
翠翠问：「什么怕人的梦？」	"What awful dream?" Cuicui asked.
就装作思索梦境似的，一面细看翠翠小脸长眉毛，一面说出他另一时张着眼睛所做的好梦。	Then, pretending to be remembering his dream, he would scrutinize Cuicui's slender face and long eyebrows while telling her of a wonderful daydream he'd imagined at another time.
不消说，那些梦原来都并不是当真怎样使人吓怕的。	Needless to say, none of these dreams were so fearsome after all.
一切河流皆得归海，话起始说得纵极远，到头来总仍然是归到使翠翠红脸那件事情上去。	All streams flow to the sea eventually.  Although the conversation took a quite different direction to start, in the end it always came back to those matters that made Cuicui blush.
待到翠翠显得不大高兴，神气上露出受了点小窘时，这老船夫又才像有了一点儿吓怕，忙着解释，用闲话来遮掩自己所说到那问题的原意。	Only when it became evident that Cuicui was displeased, her expression betraying embarrassment, did the old ferryman pretend that he was upset and hurry to explain himself, using small talk to cover up his intentions in bringing up these matters.
「翠翠，我不是那么说，我不是那么说。爷爷老了，胡涂了，笑话多咧。」	"Cuicui, that's not what I meant, not at all. Your grandfather is old and muddled, full of crazy talk."
但有时翠翠却静静的把祖父那些笑话胡涂话听下去，一直听到后来还抿着嘴儿微笑。	But sometimes Cuicui quietly listened to Grandpa's crazy talk and muddled thoughts, to the point where she found herself smiling to herself.
翠翠也会忽然说道：	She might suddenly blurt out:
「爷爷，你真是有一点儿胡涂」	"Grandfather, you really are mixed up!"
祖父听过了不再作声，他将说，「我有一大堆心事，」但来不及说，恰好就被过渡人喊走了。	Hearing that, Grandpa would stop speaking. He meant to go on to say, "There are a lot of things on my mind," but before he could speak, he was summoned by a ferry passenger.
天气热了，过渡人从远处走来，肩上挑得是七十斤担子，到了溪边，贪凉快不即走路，必蹲在岩石下茶缸边喝凉茶，与同伴交换「吹吹棒」烟管，且一面与弄渡船的攀谈。	It was hot, so when ferry passengers from far away arrived bearing eighty-pound loads on their shoulder poles, they would rest and cool off by the creek.
许多子虚乌有的话皆从此说出口来，给老船夫听到了。	Squatting under the cliffs by the keg to enjoy a cool drink of tea, they passed their long "puffer" tobacco pipe between them while drawing the ferryman into their conversation. Thus did all sorts of baseless rumors, from the heavens above to the earth below, reach the old ferryman's ears.
过渡人有时还因溪水清洁，就溪边洗脚抹澡的，坐得更久话也就更多。	Sometimes the passengers would take advantage of the clean stream waters to wash their feet or bathe. The longer they stayed, the more gossip passed between them.
祖父把些话转说给翠翠，翠翠也就学懂了许多事情。货物的价钱涨落呀，坐轿搭船的用费呀，放木筏的人把他那个木筏从滩上流下时，十来把大桡子如何活动呀，在小烟船上吃荤烟，大脚娘如何烧烟呀－－无一不备。	Grandpa passed some of the talk on to Cuicui, and she learned a good deal in the process: the rise and fall of commodity prices, the going rate for riding a sedan chair or a boat, how to steer a timber raft down the rapids using its rudders, what it was like to look for a prostitute on an opium sampan, how ladies of the night with unbound feet boiled the opium  just about everything.
傩送二老从川东押物回到了茶峒。	Nuosong, No. 2, returned to Chadong with his goods from East Sichuan.
时间已近黄昏了，溪面很寂静，祖父同翠翠在菜园地里看萝卜秧子。	It was almost dusk and very still out on the stream.  Grandpa and Cuicui were in the vegetable garden, inspecting the turnip sprouts.
翠翠白日中觉睡久了些，觉得有点寂寞，好像听人嘶声喊过渡，就争先走下溪边去。	Cuicui had napped a little too long that day and was feeling a little forlorn, so when she thought she heard a hoarse voice summon the ferry, she was the first to go down to the landing.
下坎时，见两个人站在码头边，斜阳影里背身看得极分明，正是傩送二老同他家中的长年！	As she went down the bank, she saw two men standing by the pier.  She could recognize them clearly in the light of the setting sun, though their backs were to her: it was Nuosong, No. 2, and the family servant!
翠翠大吃一惊，同小兽物见到猎人一样，回头便向山竹林里跑掉了。	Startled, like a little wild animal encountering a hunter, Cuicui ran back into the bamboo grove on the hill.
但那两个在溪边的人，听到脚步响时，一转身，也就看明白这件事情了。	But the two men at the stream turned around at the sound of her footfall and saw everything.
等了一下再也不见人来，那长年又嘶声音喊叫过渡。	They waited a while and still no one came, so the servant shouted again for the ferry in his raspy voice.
老船夫听得清清楚楚，却仍然蹲在萝卜秧地上数菜，心里觉得好笑。	The old ferryman heard him very clearly, but continued squatting in the garden, counting his turnip sprouts. He found it amusing.
他已见到翠翠走去，他知道必是翠翠看明白了过渡人是谁，故蹲在那高岩上不理会。	He'd seen Cuicui take flight and knew it must be because she recognized someone at the landing.  He purposely kept on squatting under the high cliffs, ignoring the men.
翠翠人小不管事，过渡人求她不干，奈何她不得，故只好嘶着个喉咙叫过渡了。	Cuicui was young and not in charge; when she didn't respond to the men who wanted to cross, they had no recourse but to keep straining their voices to summon the ferry.
那长年叫了几声，见无人来，就停了，同二老说：「这是什么玩意儿，难道老的害病弄翻了，只剩下翠翠一个人了吗？」二老说：「等等看，不算什么」就等了一阵。因为这边在静静的等着，园地上老船夫却在心里想：「难道是二老吗？」他彷佛担心搅恼了翠翠似的，就仍然蹲着不动。	After several more shouts, the hired man rested his tired voice and asked No. 2, "What's this all about? You don't suppose the old man is down sick and has left the ferry to Cuicui all by herself?" No. 2 answered, "Let's wait, we're in no hurry!" So they waited awhile. Because the passengers had fallen quiet, the old ferryman in the garden thought to himself: "Could it be No. 2?" As if afraid of annoying Cuicui further, he kept on squatting there and didn't make a move.
但再过一阵，溪边又喊起过渡来了，声音不同了一点，这才真是二老的声音。	But not long after, the shouting for the ferry resumed, and this time it sounded a little different.  It was No. 2's voice.
生气了吧？	Was he angry?
等久了吧？	Tired of waiting?
吵嘴了吧？	Had there been an argument?
老船夫一面胡乱估着一面跑到溪边去。	Frantically trying to size up the situation, the old ferryman raced down to the stream bank.
到了溪边，见两个人业已上了船，其中之一正是二老。	When he got there, he saw the two men already aboard the boat, and one of them was No. 2.
老船夫惊讶的喊叫：	The old ferryman shouted out, anxiously,
「呀，二老，你回来了」	"Hey there, No. 2, you're back!"
年青人很不高兴似的，「回来了。－－你们这渡船是怎么的，等了半天也不来个人」	Showing his displeasure, the young man answered, "Yes, I'm back. What's wrong with you folks at the ferry? We waited forever and no one came for us!"
「我以为－－」老船夫四处一望，并不见翠翠的影子，只见黄狗从山上竹林里跑来，知道翠翠上山了，便改口说，「我以为你们过了渡。」	"I thought it was  " he looked all around and there was no trace of Cuicui, but just then the yellow dog ran out of the bamboo grove on the mountain, so he knew she had gone up there. He changed his drift and said: "I thought you had already crossed over."
「过了渡！不得你上船，谁敢开船？」那长年说着，一只水鸟掠着水面飞去，「翠鸟儿归窠了，我们还得赶回家去吃夜饭」	"Already crossed over? Who would dare launch the boat without you?" said the servant. As he spoke, a waterfowl skimmed over the water. "That jade-green bird is headed toward its nest. We have to hurry back home in time for supper!"
「早咧，到河街早咧，」说着，老船夫已跳上了船，且在心中一面说着，「你不是想承继这只渡船吗」一面把船索拉动，船便离岸了。	"You're in time, you've got plenty of time to get to River Street." The old ferryman had already jumped into the boat. "Don't you want to inherit this ferryboat for your own?" he thought, as he pulled on the cable and the boat left the shore.
「二老，路上累得很！－－」	"No. 2, it must have been a tiring trip!"
老船夫说着，二老不置可否不动感情听下去。	As the old ferryman spoke, No. 2 listened without letting on how he was feeling.
船拢了岸，那年青小伙子同家中长年挑担子翻山走了。	When they reached the shore, the young man and his servant shouldered their loads and crossed over the hill without saying a word.
那点淡漠印象留在老船夫心上，老船夫于是在两个人身后，捏紧拳头威吓了三下，轻轻的吼着，把船拉回去了。	The old ferryman took note of their coolness.  He shook his fist at them behind their backs, shook it three times.  He cursed them under his breath and pulled the boat back to his side.
第十九章	CHAPTER NINETEEN
翠翠向竹林里跑去，老船夫半天还不下船，这件事从傩送二老看来，前途显然有点不利。	Cuicui's flight into the bamboo grove and the old ferryman's long delay in coming down to the landing suggested to Nuosong that his prospects here were not good.
虽老船夫言词之间，无一句话不在说明「这事有边」，但那畏畏缩缩的说明，极不得体，二老想起他的哥哥，便把这件事曲解了。	Although the old ferryman was constantly intimating that Nuosong "had a chance for success in this," the old man's hesitant explanations were very inept; they made No. 2 think of his elder brother, and he misinterpreted them.
他有一点愤愤不平，有一点儿气恼。	He felt a little aggrieved and a little angry.
回到家里第三天，中寨有人来探口风，在河街顺顺家中住下，把话问及顺顺，想明白二老是不是还有意接受那座新碾坊，顺顺就转问二老自己意见怎么样。	On his third day back home, someone arrived from Middle Stockade to sound him out.  During an overnight stay in Shunshun's house on River Street, the man asked Shunshun where No. 2 stood  did he still want the new mill or not?  Shunshun referred the question to No. 2 himself.
二老说：「爸爸，你以为这事为你，家中多座碾坊多个人，你可以快活，你就答应了。	No. 2 answered, "Papa, if this is for you  if adding a mill and a woman to the household would make you happy, then you give the go-ahead.
若果为的是我，我要好好去想一下，过些日子再说它吧。	If this is for me, then I need to think it over and wait a few days before answering.
我还不知道我应当得座碾坊，还是应当得一只渡船：我命里或只许我撑个渡船！」	I still don't know if I ought to take the mill or the ferryboat; perhaps my fate will only allow me to operate the boat!"
探口风的人把话记住，回中寨去报命，到碧溪岨过渡时，到了老船夫，想起二老说的话，不由得不咪咪的笑着。	The man who'd come to sound them out marked these words and set out for Middle Stockade to report on his mission.  When he came to the ferry at Green Creek Hill and saw the old ferryman, he recalled No. 2's words and couldn't help smiling to himself.
老船夫问明白了他是中寨人，就又问他过茶峒作什么事。	On learning that the man was from Middle Stockade, the ferryman asked him what business he had in town.
那心中有分寸的中寨人说：	The Middle Stockade man knew enough to be circumspect in his words:
「什么事也不作，只是过河街船总顺顺家里坐了一会儿。」	"Nothing much, I just went to Fleetmaster Shunshun's house on River Street and sat a spell."
「无事不登三宝殿，坐了一定就有话说！」	"They say one doesn't go to the Temple of the Three Buddhist Treasures without a good reason. If you sat down there you must have had something to say!"
「话倒说了几句。」	"We did exchange some pleasantries."
「说了些什么话？」那人不再说了，老船夫却问道，「听说你们中寨人想把大河边一座碾坊连同家中闺女送给河街上顺顺，这事情有不有了点眉目？」	"What did you talk about?" The other man said nothing further, so the old ferryman went on: "I hear that someone from Middle Stockade wants to give away a mill by the riverside, together with his daughter, to Shunshun down on River Street. Has there been any progress in that matter?"
那中寨人笑了，「事情成了。我问过顺顺，顺顺很愿意同中寨人结亲家，又问过那小伙子－－」	The man from Middle Stockade grinned. "It's a done deal. I asked Shunshun. He's quite willing to join families with the man from Middle Stockade.  Then he asked the young man  "
「小伙子意思怎么样？」	"And how did he feel about it?"
「他说：我眼前有座碾坊，有条渡船，我本想要渡船，现在就决定要碾坊吧。	"He said: 'A mill and a ferryboat lie before me. Originally I wanted the ferry, but now I've decided on the mill.
渡船是活动的，不如碾坊固定。	A boat is always on the move, whereas a mill stays in place.'
这小子会打算盘呢。」	That fellow has a head on him."
中寨人是个米场经纪人，话说得极有斤两，他明知道「渡船」指的是什么，但他可并不说穿。	This man from Middle Stockade was a rice broker, good at weighing his words. He well knew what the "ferryboat" referred to, but he didn't let on.
他看到老船夫口唇蠕动，想要说话，中寨人便又抢着说道：	When he saw the old ferryman start to speak, the Middle Stockade man broke in first:
「一切皆是命，半点不由人。可怜顺顺家那个大老，相貌一表堂堂，会淹死在水里！」	"Everything depends on fate. Human actions hardly have a hand in it. It's too bad that Shunshun's No. 1  such a handsome lad  had to drown in the river!"
老船夫被这句话在心上戳了一下，把想问的话咽住了。	This stabbed the old ferryman right in the heart.  He swallowed the words he was about to speak.
中寨人上岸走去后，老船夫闷闷的立在船头，痴了许久。	After the man from Middle Stockade had come ashore and gone on his way, the old ferryman stood dejectedly in the prow of his boat, dazed.
又把二老日前过渡时落寞神气温习一番，心中大不快乐。	Ruminating about how distant No. 2 had been the time before, he felt very upset.
翠翠在塔下玩得极高兴，走到溪边高岩上想要祖父唱唱歌，见祖父不理会她，一路埋怨赶下溪边去，到了溪边方见到祖父神气十分沮丧，不明白为什么原因。	Cuicui was quite happily occupied under the pagoda.  She went up to the high bluffs, wanting Grandpa to sing to her from below, but he paid her no attention.  She went down to the stream, sulking, until she saw that Grandpa for some unknown reason looked very dispirited.
翠翠来了，祖父看看翠翠的快活黑脸儿，粗卤的笑笑。	When Cuicui approached and Grandpa saw her dusky, happy face, he put on a semblance of a smile.
对溪有扛货物过渡的，便不说什么，沉默的把船拉过溪，到了中心却大声唱起歌来了。	But there was someone transporting goods awaiting the ferry on the other side, so Grandpa said nothing.  He pulled the boat south across the stream in silence, until midway he broke out loudly into song.
把人渡了过溪，祖父跳上码头走近翠翠身边来，还是那么粗卤的笑着，把手抚着头额。	After ferrying the passenger, Grandpa jumped up on the dock and went up to Cuicui with a wry smile on his face again.  He wiped his forehead with his hand.
翠翠说：	Cuicui said,
「爷爷怎么的，你发痧了？你躺到荫下去歇歇，我来管船！」	"What's the matter, Grandfather, are you suffering from heatstroke? Lie down and rest in the shade! I'll take care of the boat."
「你来管船，好，这只船归你管！」	"Yes, you take care of it. Fine. Excellent, this boat is yours to take care of!"
老船夫似乎当真发了痧，心头发闷，虽当着翠翠还显出硬扎样子，独自走回屋里后，找寻得到一些碎瓷片，在自己臂上腿上扎了几下，放出了些乌血，就躺到床上睡了。	He felt like he really did have heatstroke. He was sick at heart. Though he put up a strong front before Cuicui, when he was alone in the house he found a piece of broken porcelain, cut himself in a few places on his arms and legs to let out some blood, then lay down to sleep.
翠翠自己守船，心中却古怪的快乐，心想：「爷爷不为我唱歌，我自己会唱！」	Taking up her post on the boat, Cuicui felt strangely euphoric. She thought: "If Grandfather won't sing for me, I'll sing myself."
她唱了许多歌，老船夫躺在床上闭着眼睛，一句一句听下去，心中极乱。	She sang a good many songs.  Lying in bed with his eyes shut and listening closely, the old ferryman grew anxious.
但他知道这不是能够把他打倒的大病，他明天就仍然会爬起来的。	But he knew that this illness would not be the end of him; he would still be able to get up tomorrow.
他想明天进城，到河街去看看，又想起许多旁的事情。	He decided to go to town the next day and look around on River Street.  He also mulled over many other matters.
但到了第二天，人虽起了床，头还沉沉的。	When the morning came, however, though he left the bed, his head still hung heavy.
祖父当真已病了。	Grandpa was truly ill.
翠翠显得懂事了些，为祖父煎了一罐大发药，逼着祖父喝，又在屋后菜园地里摘取蒜苗泡在米汤里作酸蒜苗。	Cuicui, knowing just what to do, boiled up a pot of fever-breaking herbal medicine and made Grandpa drink it.  She also went out back to the garden to pick sour garlic sprouts for steeping in rice broth, as a cure.
一面照料船只，一面还时时刻刻抽空赶回家里来看祖父，问这样那样。	She frequently took time out from minding the boat to return home and look in on Grandpa and ply him with questions.
祖父可不说什么，只是为一个秘密痛苦着。	But he had nothing to say; a secret pained him.
躺了三天，人居然好了。	Yet, after three days in bed, he was well.
屋前屋后走动了一下，骨头还硬硬的，心中惦念到一件事情，便预备进城过河街去。	He seemed strong as ever as he paced in front and back of the house, but something was worrying him, so he prepared to journey to River Street.
翠翠看不出祖父有什么要紧事情必须当天进城，请求他莫去。	Cuicui couldn't understand what could be so important as to make Grandpa go to town so soon.  She begged him not to go.
老船夫把手搓着，估量到是不是应说出那个理由。	The old ferryman rubbed his hands together, wondering whether he ought to tell her what his business was.
翠翠一张黑黑的瓜子脸，一双水汪汪的眼睛，使他吁了一口气。	Standing before Cuicui, with her bright eyes and dark, oval face, he had to sigh.
他说：「我有要紧事情，得今天去！」	"I have something important to do," he said, "and I have to go today!"
翠翠苦笑着说：「有多大要紧事情，还不是－－」	Cuicui smiled disdainfully: "What's so urgent? Surely it's not  "
老船夫知道翠翠脾气，听翠翠口气已有点不高兴，不再说要走了，把预备带走的竹筒，同扣花褡裢搁到条几上后，带点儿谄媚笑着说：「不去吧，你担心我会摔死，我就不去吧。	The old ferryman knew his granddaughter's temper; he could hear the unhappiness in her voice, so he stopped insisting on going. Laying on the table the bamboo tube and embroidered cloth shoulder bag he'd prepared for the trip, he said, with a fawning smile, "All right, I won't go. Since you're afraid I might fall down dead, I won't go.
我以为早上天气不很热，到城里把事办完了就回来－－不去也得，我明天去！」	I thought I'd go to town in the morning, before it got too hot, and finish my business  but I don't have to go. I can go tomorrow!"
翠翠轻声的温柔的说：「你明天去也好，你腿还软，好好的躺一天再起来。」	Cuicui replied, softly and gently, "Yes, tomorrow will be fine. Your legs are still weak! A day's rest will do you good."
老船夫似乎心中还不甘服，洒着两手走出去，门限边一个打草鞋的棒槌，差点儿把他绊了一大跤。稳住了时翠翠苦笑着说：「爷爷，你瞧，还不服气！」	Seeming not really willing to give in, the old ferryman shrugged and stepped away.  As he crossed over the high door threshold, he nearly tripped headlong over the stick he used to make straw sandals. When he'd steadied himself, Cuicui put on a pained smile and said: "Grandfather, you see, you still don't know how to take advice!"
老船夫拾起那棒槌，向屋角隅摔去，说道：「爷爷老了！过几天打豹子给你看！」	The old man picked up the stick and threw it into a corner of the room, adding: "Your grandfather may be old, but just wait a few days, and I'll hunt you a leopard!"
到了午后，落了一阵行雨，老船夫却同翠翠好好商量，仍然进了城。	In the afternoon it rained, but the old ferryman said good-bye to Cuicui and went to town anyway.
翠翠不能陪祖父进城，就要黄狗跟去。	Since Cuicui couldn't go with him, she insisted that the yellow dog accompany him.
老船夫在城里被一个熟人拉着谈了许久的盐价米价，又过守备衙门看了一会新买的骡马，才到河街顺顺家里去。	Once in town, he was detained by a friend who wanted to talk about the price of salt and rice.  Then he went to the army barracks to see the new mules and horses purchased by the head of the likin tax bureau before he finally got to Shunshun's house on River Street.
到了那里，见到顺顺正同三个人打纸牌，不便谈话，就站在身后看了一阵牌，后来顺顺请他喝酒，借口病刚好点不敢喝酒，推辞了。	There he found Shunshun playing cards with three other men.  Unable to speak to him in private, he just stood behind Shunshun and looked at his hand.  After a while Shunshun invited him for a drink, but the ferryman begged off, on the excuse that he had been sick.
牌既不散场，老船夫又不想即走，顺顺似乎并不明白他等着有何话说，却只注意手中的牌。	The card players weren't ready to go home and the old ferryman wasn't about to leave, either.  Shunshun seemed unable to figure out why he had come; he just concentrated on his hand.
后来老船夫的神气倒为另外一个人看出了，就问他是不是有什么事情。	It was another man who took note of the old ferryman's discomfort and asked if he had something to discuss.
老船夫方忸忸怩怩照老方子搓着他那两只大手，说别的事没有，只想同船总说两句话。	That made the old ferryman rub his two hands together nervously, as was his habit, and say, not really, he just wanted to exchange a word or two with the fleetmaster.
那船总方明白在看牌半天的理由，回头对老船夫笑将起来。	The fleetmaster finally understood why the ferryman had been standing behind him, looking at his cards for so long. He turned around and smiled at the old ferryman.
「怎不早说？你不说，我还以为你在看我牌学张子！」	"Why didn't you say so? You didn't say anything, so I thought you must be trying to learn a few tricks of the game."
「没有什么，只是三五句话，我不便扫兴，不敢说出。」船总把牌向桌上一撒，笑着向后房走去了，老船夫跟在身后。	"It's nothing, just a little something I wanted to talk about. I didn't want to spoil the fun  didn't dare interrupt you." The fleetmaster threw his cards down on the table. Smiling, he went into the back room, with the old ferryman following behind.
「什么事？」船总问着，神气似乎先就明白了他来此要说的话，显得略微有点儿怜悯的样子。	"What's on your mind?" the fleetmaster asked, with an expression hinting that he knew what the boatman was about to say, and also bearing a touch of pity.
「我听一个中寨人说，你预备同中寨团总打亲家，是不是真事？」	"I heard a man from Middle Stockade say you were preparing to link your family in marriage with the militia captain there. Is it true?"
船总见老船夫的眼睛盯着他的脸，想得一个满意的回答，就说：「有这事情。」	The fleetmaster could see the old ferryman's eyes fixed on him, begging for the answer he wanted. "You've heard right," said the fleetmaster.
那么答应，意思却是：「有了你怎么样？」	But the implication was, "What's it to you?"
老船夫说：「真的吗？」	"That's a fact?" the old ferryman asked.
那一个又很自然的说：「真的。」意思却依旧包含了「真的又怎么样？」	"True enough," the other said, unconcernedly. But the implication, again, was another question: "Fact is, what business is it of yours?"
老船夫装得很从容的问：「二老呢？」	Pretending to be completely unruffled, the old ferryman asked, "What does No. 2 say?"
船总说：「二老坐船下桃源好些日子了！」	The fleetmaster replied: "No. 2 has taken a boat down to Taoyuan and been gone for several days now!"
二老下桃源的事，原来还同他爸爸吵了一阵才走的。	As it happened, No. 2 had gone downriver to Taoyuan only after quarreling with his father.
船总性情虽异常豪爽，可不愿意间接把第一个儿子弄死的女孩子，又来作第二个儿子的媳妇，这是很明白的事情。	The fleetmaster might be extremely open-minded, but that didn't mean he was willing to have the girl who had killed his first son, even if indirectly, become the wife of his second; that was very clear.
若照当地风气，这些事认为只是小孩子的事，大人管不着，二老当真欢喜翠翠，翠翠又爱二老，他也并不反对这种爱怨纠缠的婚姻。	Local custom held that these things were all up to the younger generation  the elders were not to interfere.  No. 2 was truly fond of Cuicui, and Cuicui loved No. 2 also.  The fleetmaster was not opposed to this sort of love match.
但不知怎么的，老船夫对于这件事的关心，使二老父子对于老船夫反而有了一点误会。	But for some reason, the old ferryman's concentration on the matter had made both father and son misunderstand his motives.
船总想起家庭间的近事，以为全与这老而好事的船夫有关。	Whenever the fleetmaster thought of his recent family tragedy, he associated it with this old and meddlesome boatman.
虽不见诸形色，心中却有个疙瘩。	There was no outward sign of it, but inwardly there was a big hitch.
船总不让老船夫再开口了，就语气略粗的说道：	Without letting the old ferryman continue, the fleetmaster told him, somewhat bluntly:
「伯伯，算了吧，我们的口只应当喝酒了，莫再只想替儿女唱歌！	"Uncle, no more of this. Our mouths are for drinking, not singing the young folks' songs for them!
你的意思我全明白，你是好意。	I know exactly what you mean to say, and you mean well.
可是我也求你明白我的意思，我以为我们只应当谈点自己分上的事情，不适宜于想那些年青人的门路了。」	But I'm asking you to understand my position. We should talk about matters that are up to us, not try to pull strings for our youngsters."
老船夫被一个闷拳打倒后，还想说两句话，但船总却不让他再有说话机会，把他拉出到牌桌边去。	After this final blow, the old ferryman still had something to say, but the fleetmaster wouldn't let him speak another word; he pulled him back to the card table.
老船夫无话可说，看看船总时，船总虽还笑着谈到许多笑话，心中却似乎很沉郁，把牌用力掷到桌上去。	The old ferryman was speechless.  He looked at the fleetmaster, who was smiling and telling lots of jokes, but the way he threw down his cards showed his distress.
老船夫不说什么，戴起他那个斗笠，自己走了。	Without another word, the old ferryman donned his conical hat and left.
天气还早，老船夫心中很不高兴，又进城去找杨马兵。	It was still early, so the dejected old man went back into town to find Horseman Yang.
那马兵正在喝酒，老船夫虽推病，也免不了喝个三五杯。	He was drinking.  The old ferryman pleaded that he was still sick, but couldn't help drinking a few cups of liquor anyway.
回到碧溪岨，走得热了一点，又用溪水去抹身子。	Feeling hot from the walking by the time he got to Green Creek Hill, he washed himself in the stream.
觉得很疲倦，就要翠翠守船，自己回家睡去了。	He was tired, so he asked Cuicui to keep on tending the boat while he went home and slept.
黄昏时天气十分郁闷，溪面各处飞着红蜻蜓。	As dusk fell, the weather became quite oppressive.  The stream was covered with red dragonflies.
天上已起了云，热风把两山竹篁吹得声音极大，看样子到晚上必落大雨。	Mist was already gathering and hot winds were noisily rustling the bamboos in the mountain groves on either side of the stream.  It looked as if it would rain that night.
翠翠守在渡船上，看着那些溪面飞来飞去的蜻蜓，心也极乱。	Cuicui was with the boat, watching the dragonflies as they flitted across the creek.  Her heart was ill at ease, too.
看祖父脸上颜色惨惨的，放心不下，便又赶回家中去。	Seeing Grandpa so dejected, she grew worried and hurried home.
先以为祖父一定早睡了，谁知还坐在门限上打草鞋！	She thought he would already be in bed, but he was sitting on the doorstep, weaving straw sandals!
「爷爷，你要多少双草鞋，床头上不是还有十四双吗？怎么不好好的躺一躺？」	"Grandfather, how many shoes do you need? Aren't there fourteen pairs up by your bed as it is? Why don't you lie down and rest?"
老船夫不作声，却站起身来昂头向天空望着，轻轻的说：	Instead of answering, the old ferryman stood up and looked at the sky. He said, softly:
「翠翠，今晚上要落大雨响大雷的！回头把我们的船系到岩下去，这雨大哩。」	"Cuicui, there'll be a heavy thunderstorm tonight! Let's tie up our boat under the cliffs. The rain tonight is going to be heavy."
翠翠说：「爷爷，我真吓怕！」翠翠怕的似乎并不是晚上要来的雷雨。	Cuicui said, "Grandfather, I'm afraid!" But what Cuicui feared didn't seem to be the coming thunderstorm.
老船夫似乎也懂得那个意思，就说：「怕什么？一切要来的都得来，不必怕！」	Acting as if he hadn't understood her, the old ferryman said, "What's there to be afraid of? What will be will be. Don't be scared."
第二十章	CHAPTER TWENTY
夜间果然落了大雨，夹以吓人的雷声。	The night did bring a great storm, accompanied by frightening thunderclaps.
电光从屋脊上掠过时，接着就是訇的一个炸电。	Lightning swept over the rooftop, followed by a deafening crash of thunder.
翠翠在暗中抖着。	Cuicui quivered in the dark.
祖父也醒了，知道她害怕，且担心她着凉，还起身来把一条布单搭到她身上去。	Grandpa woke up, too.  Sensing her fear, and worried that she might catch cold, he got up to cover her with a sheet.
祖父说：	Grandpa said:
「翠翠，不要怕」	"Cuicui, don't be afraid!
翠翠说：「我不怕」说了还想说：「爷爷你在这里我不怕」訇的一个大雷，接着是一种超越雨声而上的洪大闷重倾圮声。	Cuicui replied, "I'm not." Meanwhile she thought to herself: "Grandfather, I'm not afraid because you're here!" There came another roll of thunder, and then, overpowering the sound of the rain, the deadening sound of something giving way.
两人都以为一定是溪岸悬崖崩塌了，担心到那只渡船会压在崖石下面去了。	Both of them were sure that the hanging cliffs by the stream bank must have caved in!  They feared that their boat was crushed under collapsing rocks from the cliffs.
祖孙两人便默默的躺在床上听雨声雷声。	Grandfather and granddaughter kept silent in their beds, listening to the sound of the rain and thunder.
但无论如何大雨，过不久，翠翠却依然睡着了。	Even with the downpour, Cuicui was soon asleep again.
醒来时天已亮了，雨不知在何时业已止息，只听到溪两岸山沟里注水入溪的声音。	When she woke up, it was already daylight.  The rain had stopped without her noticing.  She heard only the sound of torrents from the gullies entering the stream from the mountains on both sides.  Cuicui got up out of bed.
翠翠爬起身来，看看祖父还似乎睡得很好，开了门走出去。	Seeing Grandpa still sound asleep, she opened the door and went out.
门前已成为一个水沟，一股水便从塔后哗哗的流来，从前面悬崖直堕而下。	The ground in front of the house had become a ditch and water splashed past in a muddy stream from behind the pagoda, having come straight down from the bluffs.
并且各处都是那么一种临时的水道。	Newly formed channels of water were everywhere.
屋旁菜园地已为山水冲乱了，菜秧皆掩在粗砂泥里了。	The vegetable garden was flooded, its sprouts all covered with sand and gravel.
再走过前面去看看溪里，才知道溪中也涨了大水，已漫过了码头，水脚快到茶缸边了。	Going over to the stream, she could see that the water had risen so high that it was already brimming over the dock.  Soon it would reach the tea vat.
下到码头去的那条路，正同一条小河一样，哗哗的泄着黄泥水。	The path down to the dock was like a little river, splashing yellow mud.
过渡的那一条横溪牵定的缆绳，也被水淹没了，泊在崖下的渡船，已不见了。	The cable over the stream used to pull the boat across was already under water, and the ferryboat, previously tied up beneath the cliffs, was nowhere to be found.
翠翠看看屋前悬崖并不崩坍，故当时还不注意渡船的失去。	Observing that the bluffs in front of the house had not collapsed, after all, Cuicui at first failed to notice that the ferryboat had disappeared.
但再过一阵，她上下搜索不到这东西，无意中回头一看，屋后白塔已不见了。	But as she looked up and down for it, she involuntarily turned around, and the white pagoda behind the house was gone.
一惊非同小可，赶忙向屋后跑去，才知道白塔业已坍倒，大堆砖石极凌乱的摊在那儿。	Startled by the enormity of the loss, she hurried out to the back of the house.  The pagoda had collapsed into a big mass of bricks and stones.
翠翠吓慌得不知所措，只锐声叫她的祖父。	Cuicui was too scared to know what to do next, so she shrilly called out for her grandpa.
祖父不起身，也不答应，就赶回家里去，到得祖父床边摇了祖父许久，祖父还不作声。	When Grandpa did not get up or answer her, she ran into the house and shook him back and forth.  Still he made no sound.
原来这个老年人在雷雨将息时已死去了。	The old man had died as the thunderstorm faded away.
翠翠于是大哭起来。	Cuicui began to wail.
过一阵，有从茶峒过川东跑差事的人，到了溪边，隔溪喊过渡，翠翠正在灶边一面哭着一面烧水预备为死去的祖父抹澡。	Before long, someone going on business from Chadong to East Sichuan arrived at the stream and called out for the ferry. Cuicui was at the stove, crying as she heated water with which to wash the corpse of her grandpa.
那人以为老船夫一家还不醒，急于过河，喊叫不应，就抛掷小石头过溪，打到屋顶上。	The man thought the ferryman's family must be asleep and he was in a hurry to cross.  When his calls went unanswered, he threw a stone across the stream onto the roof of the house.
翠翠鼻涕眼泪成一片的走出来，跑到溪边高崖前站定。	Sniveling and crying, Cuicui ran out and faced the high cliffs by the stream.
「喂，不早了！把船划过来」	"Hey, it's late! Bring the boat over!"
「船跑了」	"The boat has left us!"
「你爷爷做什么事情去了呢？他管船，有责任」	"Where's your grandfather? He's in charge of the boat. It's his responsibility!"
「他管船，管五十年的船－－他死了啊」	"Yes, it's his responsibility, and he did it for fifty years  and now he's dead!"
翠翠一面向隔溪人说着一面大哭起来。	Cuicui blubbered as she spoke to the man on the other side of the stream.
那人知道老船夫死了，得进城去报信，就说：	When he heard that the old ferryman had died, he realized he must return to town and report the news.  He said:
「真死了吗？不要哭吧，我回去通知他们，要他们弄条船带东西来」	"Is he really dead? Don't cry, I'll go back to town and tell people. They'll get you a boat and whatever else you need!"
那人回到茶峒城边时，一见熟人就报告这件事，不多久，全茶峒城里外都知道这个消息了。	When he got back to Chadong, he reported the news to every friend in sight, and soon everyone knew about it, inside the town and out.
河街上船总顺顺，派人找了一只空船，带了副白木匣子，即刻向碧溪岨撑去。	Fleetmaster Shunshun of River Street sent someone to find an empty boat.  Carrying a plain, unpainted coffin, it was dispatched right away, to be poled upriver to Green Creek Hill.
城中杨马兵却同一个老军人，赶到碧溪岨去，砍了几十根大毛竹，用葛藤编作筏子，作为来往过渡的临时渡船。	Horseman Yang and an old soldier hurried over to the site on their own, where they felled several dozen giant bamboos and bound them together with vines to form a raft as a temporary ferryboat.
筏子编好后，撑了那个东西，到翠翠家中那一边岸下，留老兵守竹筏来往渡人，自己跑到翠翠家去看那个死者，眼泪湿莹莹的，摸了一会躺在床上硬僵僵的老友，又赶忙着做些应做的事情。	When the makeshift raft was ready, they poled it to the shore outside Cuicui's house.  The old soldier manned the raft for ferry passengers, while Yang hurried to Cuicui's house to see the deceased.  His eyes brimming over with tears, he stroked his dead friend, now stiff as a board, as he lay in bed. Then he busied himself making the necessary preparations.
到后帮忙的人来了，从大河船上运来棺木也来了，住在城中的老道士，还带了许多法器，一件旧麻布道袍，并提了一只大公鸡，来尽义务办理念经起水诸事，也从筏上渡过来了。	Others came to help out, and the coffin arrived on the boat sent over from the big river.  An old Daoist priest from town ferried across on the raft, bringing his ritual musical instruments, an old sackcloth Daoist robe, and an old rooster, the better to intone scripture, make his waterside pronouncements, and fulfill his other ritual duties.
家中人出出进进，翠翠只坐在灶边矮凳上呜呜的哭着。	People came and went from the house.  Cuicui simply sat on a low stool by the hearth, sobbing.
到了中午，船总顺顺也来了，还跟着一个人扛了一口袋米，一坛酒，一腿猪肉。	Come noon, Fleetmaster Shunshun arrived, too, following a servant who carried a bag of rice, a vat of wine, and a large slab of pork hindquarters.
见了翠翠就说：	He said to Cuicui:
「翠翠，爷爷死了我知道了，老年人是必需死的，不要发愁，一切有我」各方面看看，就回去了。	"Cuicui, I heard about your grandfather's death. Death happens to us all when we get old. Don't you worry, I'll take care of you!" He looked around and went home.
到了下午入了殓，一些帮忙的回的回家去了，晚上便只剩下了那老道士、杨马兵同顺顺家派来的两个年青长年。	In the afternoon, the body was put into the coffin.  People who had come to help began returning home.  By evening, the only ones left were the old Daoist priest, Horseman Yang, and two young workers that Shunshun had sent over from his house.
黄昏以前老道士用红绿纸剪了一些花朵，用黄泥作了一些烛台。	Before dusk fell, the old priest cut out some flower shapes from red and green paper and fashioned candlesticks from yellow mud.
天断黑后，棺木前小桌上点起黄色九品蜡，燃了香，棺木周围也点了小蜡烛，老道士披上那件蓝麻布道服，开始了丧事中绕棺仪式。	When it was dark, a yellow candle was lit on the small table in front of the casket.  There was incense, and other little candles were lit all around the coffin as the old Daoist priest put on his blue hempen gown and began the funeral rite of circling the coffin.
老道士在前拿着小小纸幡引路，孝子第二，马兵殿后，绕着那寂寞棺木慢慢转着圈子。	The old priest went in front, carrying a paper streamer to lead the way, followed by the filially pious daughter and the horseman in the rear, slowly going in a circle around the lonely casket.
两个长年则站在灶边空处，胡乱的打着锣钹。	The two hired men stood in an empty space by the stove, clanging a gong and cymbals to make noise.
老道士一面闭了眼睛走去，一面且唱且哼，安慰亡灵。	The old Daoist walked with his eyes closed, singing and chanting to comfort the spirit of the deceased.
提到关于亡魂所到西方极乐世界花香四季时，老马兵就把木盘里的纸花，向棺木上高高撒去，象征西方极乐世界情形。	When he got to the part about the deceased spirit going to the Western Paradise, where fragrant flowers bloomed all year long, the old horseman raised high a wooden tray of the paper flowers and scattered them over the coffin, to symbolize the bliss of paradise.
到了半夜，事情办完了，放过爆竹，蜡烛也快熄灭了，翠翠泪眼婆娑的，赶忙又到灶边去烧火，为帮忙的人办宵夜。	At midnight, the ceremony came to an end.  They set off firecrackers and the candles nearly burned out.  With tears still streaming down her face, Cuicui hastened to the kitchen to stoke the fire and prepare a midnight meal for those who had assisted.
吃了宵夜，老道士歪到死人床上睡着了。	After the meal, the old priest lay down in the bed of the deceased and slept.
剩下几个人还得照规矩在棺木前守灵，老马兵为大家唱丧堂歌，用个空的量米木升子，当作小鼓，把手剥剥剥的一面敲着一面唱下去－－唱「王祥卧冰」的事情，唱「黄香扇枕」的事情。	The others attended the coffin through the night, as was the custom.  The old horseman sang funeral songs to help the others pass the time, tapping out the rhythm on a wooden grain measuring cup as his drum.  He sang songs about children who were legendary exemplars of filial piety: about Wang Xiang, who lay naked on top of ice to catch a fish for his mean stepmother, and little Huang Xiang, who fanned the pillow of his sick father against the heat and warmed him with his own body to ward off the cold.
翠翠哭了一整天，同时也忙了一整天，到这时已倦极，把头靠在棺前眯着了。	Completely exhausted from crying and working the livelong day, Cuicui rested her head on the front of the coffin and drifted off to sleep, but the two hired hands and the horseman, having eaten and drunk a few cups of wine, were in high spirits.
两长年同马兵吃了宵夜，喝过两杯酒，精神还虎虎的，便轮流把丧堂歌唱下去。	They traded off singing their funeral songs.  Cuicui suddenly reawakened, as if from a dream.
但只一会儿，翠翠又醒了，彷佛梦到什么，惊醒后明白祖父已死，于是又幽幽的哭起来。	She came to the terrible realization that Grandpa was dead, whereupon she took up her anguished weeping again.
「翠翠，翠翠，不要哭啦，人死了哭不回来的！」	"Don't cry, Cuicui, that won't bring him back!"
秃头陈四四接着就说了一个做新嫁娘的人哭泣的笑话，话语中夹杂了三五个粗野字眼儿，因此引起两个长年咕咕的笑了许久。	The old horseman went on to tell a joke about a bride crying on her wedding day, spiced up with a few vulgar expressions that had the two workers howling with laughter.
黄狗在屋外吠着，翠翠开了大门，到外面去站了一下，耳听到各处是虫声，天上月色极好，大星子嵌进透蓝天空里，非常沉静温柔。	The yellow dog barked outside the house.  Cuicui went out and looked up.  The air buzzed with the sound of insects.  The moonlight was grand and bright stars were inlaid in the dark blue sky, creating an atmosphere of calm and serenity.
翠翠想：	Cuicui thought to herself:
「这是真事吗？爷爷当真死了吗？」	"Can it be true? Is Grandfather really dead?"
老马兵原来跟在她的后边，因为他知道女孩子心门儿窄，说不定一炉火闷在灰里，痕迹不露，见祖父去了，自己一切无望，跳崖悬梁，想跟着祖父一块儿去，也说不定！	The old horseman had followed her outside, for he knew that girls did not always show their emotions. A fire might linger under the embers without a trace; with her grandpa gone, and having lost all hope for herself, she might jump off the bluffs or hang herself, following Grandpa in death.  How could they know?
故随时小心监视到翠翠。	Therefore, he kept a constant watch over Cuicui.
老马兵见翠翠痴痴的站着，时间过了许久还不回头，就打着咳叫翠翠说：	Seeing Cuicui standing there in a daze and not turning to him for a long while, the old horseman coughed and said,
「翠翠，露水落了，不冷么？」	"Cuicui, the dew is falling. Aren't you cold?"
「不冷。」	"I don't feel cold."
「天气好得很！」	"It is fine out here!"
「呀－－」一颗大流星使翠翠轻轻的喊了一声。	"Oh!" she exclaimed softly, seeing a big shooting star.
接着南方又是一颗流星划空而下。	Then, in the south, another shooting star coursed down to earth.
对溪有猫头鹰叫。	An owl hooted on the opposite shore.
「翠翠，」老马兵业已同翠翠并排一块块儿站定了，很温和的说，「你进屋里睡去吧，不要胡思乱想！」	"Cuicui," the old horseman said to her softly, having already come up beside her: "Go indoors and sleep a while. Don't let your thoughts run wild!"
翠翠默默的回到祖父棺木前面，坐在地上又呜咽起来。	Cuicui quietly returned to her grandpa's coffin.  She sat on the floor and began sobbing again.
守在屋中两个长年已睡着了。	The two workers standing guard in the house were already fast asleep.
杨马兵便幽幽的说道：「不要哭了！不要哭了！你爷爷也难过咧，眼睛哭胀喉咙哭嘶有什么好处。	The horseman said, faintly: "Don't cry! Don't! You'll break your grandfather's heart. It's no good to cry your eyes red and your voice hoarse.
听我说，爷爷的心事我全都知道，一切有我。	Listen, I know exactly what your grandfather intended.  Leave it all to me.
我会把一切安排得好好的，对得起你爷爷。	I'll arrange everything so it works out right, so I can face your grandfather.
我会安排，什么事都会。	I'm up to it  I can do whatever is needed.
我要一个爷爷欢喜你也欢喜的人来接收这渡船！	I want this ferryboat to go to someone that your grandfather liked and that you like.
不能如我们的意，我老虽老，还能拿镰刀同他们拚命。	If someone gets in the way, I may be old, but I can still wield my scythe and deal with him.
翠翠，你放心，一切有我！－－」	Don't worry, Cuicui, I'll take care of everything!"
远处不知什么地方鸡叫了，老道士在那边床上糊胡涂涂的自言自语：「天亮了吗？早咧！」	Somewhere far away, a cock crowed. The old Daoist priest mumbled to himself, half asleep, in bed: "Is it daylight? Time to rise and shine!"
第二十一章	CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
大清早，帮忙的人从城里拿了绳索杠子赶来了。	Bright and early the next day, friends came from town, bringing ropes and carrying poles.
老船夫的白木小棺材，为六个人抬着到那个倾圮了的塔后山岨上去埋葬时，船总顺顺，马兵，翠翠，老道士，黄狗皆跟在后面。	Fleetmaster Shunshun, the horseman, Cuicui, the old Daoist, and the yellow dog followed behind as six bearers carried the old ferryman's small, unvarnished coffin to the hill behind the collapsed pagoda for burial.
到了预先掘就的方阱边，老道士照规矩先跳下去，把一点朱砂颗粒同白米安置到阱中四隅及中央，又烧了一点纸钱，爬出阱时就要抬棺木的人动手下肂。	When they got to a pit that had been dug to receive the body, the old Daoist priest jumped down into it and, according to custom, sprinkled flecks of cinnabar and white rice in the four corners and the center before burning a little spirit money.
翠翠哑着喉咙干号，伏在棺木上不起身。	Then he crawled up out of the grave to let the bearers lower the coffin.  Unable to summon up any more tears, Cuicui cried hoarsely and threw herself across it, refusing to get up.
经马兵用力把她拉开，方能移动棺木。	The coffin could be moved only after the horseman forcefully drew her aside.
一会儿，那棺木便下了阱，拉去绳子，调整了方向，被新土掩盖了，翠翠还坐在地上呜咽。	After that the coffin was lowered, with the ropes being tugged this way and that to square it in the pit.  Fresh earth was piled on top as Cuicui remained sitting on the ground, sobbing.
老道士要回城去替人做斋，过渡走了。	The Daoist priest had to hurry back to town via the ferry to perform rites for sending another dead soul up to heaven.
船总把一切事托给老马兵，也赶回城去了。	The busy fleetmaster, after entrusting the affairs on this side of the stream to the old horseman, likewise hurried back to town.
帮忙的皆到溪边去洗手，家中各人还有各人的事，且知道这家人的情形，不便再叨扰，也不再惊动主人，过渡回家去了。	All those who had been helping out went down to the stream to wash their hands.  Each household had its own affairs to tend to, and they knew it was not the time for more polite words that would upset the next of kin, so they took the ferry home, too.
于是碧溪岨便只剩下三个人，一个是翠翠，一个是老马兵，一个是由船总家派来暂时帮忙照料渡船的秃头陈四四。	That left behind only three people at Green Creek Hill: Cuicui, the old horseman, and Baldy Chen, also known as Fourth of the Fourth from his birth date, whom the fleetmaster had sent to temporarily tend the ferry.
黄狗因被那秃头打了一石头，对于那秃头彷佛很不高兴，尽是轻轻的吠着。	Having felt the sting of a stone cast by the bald man, the yellow dog, nursing his resentment, softly yelped to express his unhappiness.
到了下午，翠翠同老马兵商量，要老马兵回城去把马托给营里人照料，再回碧溪岨来陪她。	Cuicui had a talk with the old horseman that afternoon.  She pleaded with him to return to town and get someone else in camp to take care of his horses, so he could return to Green Creek Hill to stay with her.
老马兵回转碧溪岨时，秃头陈四四被打发回城去了。	When the old horseman got back, Baldy Chen was dispatched back to town.
翠翠仍然自己同黄狗来弄渡船，让老马兵坐在溪岸高崖上玩，或嘶着个老喉咙唱歌给她听。	Cuicui and the yellow dog went back to operating the ferry, letting the old horseman amuse himself on the high bluffs or sing her songs in that old, gravelly voice of his.
过三天后船总来商量接翠翠过家里去住，翠翠却想看守祖父的坟山，不愿即刻进城。	Three days later, the fleetmaster came to propose that Cuicui come live in his house, but Cuicui, who wished to tend her grandpa's grave, wasn't ready to move.
只请船总过城里衙门去为说句话，许杨马兵暂时同她住住，船总顺顺答应了这件事，就走了。	Instead she wanted the fleetmaster to speak to the government offices, to ask that Horseman Yang be allowed to live with her for the time being.  Fleetmaster Shunshun agreed and went on his way.
杨马兵既是个上五十岁了的人，说故事的本领比翠翠祖父高一筹，加之凡事特别关心，做事又勤快又干净，因此同翠翠住下来，使翠翠彷佛去了一个祖父，却新得了一个伯父。	Well past fifty now, Horseman Yang was an even better storyteller than Cuicui's grandpa.
过渡时有人问及可怜的祖父，黄昏时想起祖父，皆使翠翠心酸，觉得十分凄凉。	He was neat and diligent in his work and conscientious about everything; he made Cuicui feel that in losing a grandfather, she had gained an uncle.  When the ferry passengers inquired about her poor grandpa, or when she got to thinking about him at nightfall, she felt miserable and dejected.
但这分凄凉日子过久一点，也就渐渐淡薄些了。	But as the days passed, her misery weakened a little.
两人每日在黄昏中同晚上，坐在门前溪边高崖上，谈点那个躺在湿土里可怜祖父的旧事，有许多是翠翠先前所不知道的，说来便更使翠翠心中柔和。	As the horseman sat with the girl on the high bluffs by the stream every evening in the dusk and in the darkness, telling her stories about the poor old man lying in the wet soil, many of which she had never heard before, Cuicui's heart was put at ease.
又说到翠翠的父亲，那个又要爱情又惜名誉的军人，在当时按照绿营军勇的装束，如何使女孩子动心。	And he told Cuicui about her father, the soldier who valued both romantic love and honor, and how he had turned the local girls' heads in that smart uniform of his, the outfit of a brave in the Army of the Green Standard.
又说到翠翠的母亲，如何善于唱歌，而且所唱的那些歌在当时如何流行。	He also told Cuicui about her mother  what a wonderful singer she was, and how the melodies and lyrics she made up were repeated far and wide.
时候变了，一切也自然不同了，皇帝已不再坐江山，平常人还消说！	But times had changed, and with them, all the local customs.  If the emperor no longer ruled over the hills and valleys, how tumultuous had it been for ordinary folk!
杨马兵想起自己年青作马夫时，牵了马匹到碧溪岨来对翠翠母亲唱歌，翠翠母亲不理会，到如今这自己却成为这孤雏的唯一靠山唯一信托人，不由得不苦笑。	Horseman Yang recalled that when he was a young man and just a groom, he had led his horse to Green Creek Hill and sung to Cuicui's mother, but she paid him no attention.  And now he was this young orphan's sole support and intimate.  He couldn't suppress a knowing smile.
因为两人每个黄昏必谈祖父以及这一家有关系的事情，后来便说到了老船夫死前的一切，翠翠因此明白了祖父活时所不提到的许多事。	Because the two talked every evening at dusk, of Grandpa and everything about the family, and finally all that had happened before the old ferryman's death, Cuicui came to understand many things that Grandpa hadn't dared to mention while he was alive.
二老的唱歌，顺顺大儿子的死，顺顺父子对于祖父的冷淡，中寨人用碾坊作陪嫁妆奁诱惑傩送二老，二老既记忆着哥哥的死亡，且因得不到翠翠理会，又被家中逼着接受那座碾坊，意思还在渡船，因此赌气下行，祖父的死因，又如何与翠翠有关－－凡是翠翠不明白的事，如今可全明白了。	No. 2's singing on the bluffs; the death of No. 1; the subsequent aloofness of Shunshun and his son toward Grandpa; the grain mill offered by the Middle Stockade captain as a dowry to entice Nuosong; how No. 2, remembering the death of his elder brother and feeling ignored by Cuicui, was pressed by his family to take the mill yet still preferred the ferryboat, until he fled downstream in anger; and how her grandpa's death had something to do with Cuicui  all that Cuicui hadn't been able to understand, now became clear.
翠翠把事弄明白后，哭了一个夜晚。	Once Cuicui understood, she cried the whole night long.
过了四七，船总顺顺派人来请马兵进城去，商量把翠翠接到他家中去，作为二老的媳妇。但二老人既在辰州，先就莫提这件事，且搬过河街去住，等二老回来时再看二老意思。	When the fourth week of mourning had passed, Fleetmaster Shunshun sent a man to ask the horseman back to town.  He proposed that Cuicui come into his home, as the future wife of No. 2.  But since No. 2 was in Chenzhou, they could not announce it; they would first have to ask No. 2 how he felt.
马兵以为这件事得问翠翠。	The horseman thought that they should ask Cuicui first.
回来时，把顺顺的意思向翠翠说过后，又为翠翠出主张，以为名分既不定妥，到一个生人家里去不好，还是不如在碧溪岨等，等到二老驾船回来时，再看二老意思。	When Horseman Yang got back and told Cuicui of Shunshun's proposal, he advised her not to move to a stranger's house while her fate was so unsettled; best to stay at Green Creek Hill until No. 2 sailed home, to hear his opinion.
这办法决定后，老马兵以为二老不久必可回来的，就依然把马匹托营上人照料，在碧溪岨为翠翠作伴，把一个一个日子过下去。	That settled, and the old horseman thinking that No. 2 would soon return, he entrusted his horses to someone else at camp and stayed at Green Creek Hill to keep Cuicui company. The days passed.
碧溪岨的白塔，与茶峒风水有关系，塔圮坍了，不重新作一个自然不成。	The white pagoda at Green Creek Hill was important to the feng shui of Chadong.  It was, of course, imperative that a new pagoda be built there.
除了城中营管，税局以及各商号各平民捐了些钱以外，各大寨子也有人拿册子去捐钱。	The military camp, the revenue bureau, and all the shops and ordinary citizens contributed money.
为了这塔成就并不是给谁一个人的好处，应尽每个人来积德造福，尽每个人皆有捐钱的机会，因此在渡船上也放了个两头有节的大竹筒，中部锯了一口，尽过渡人自由把钱投进去，竹筒满了马兵就捎进城中首事人处去，另外又带了个竹筒回来。	All the big stockades brought in money, too.  The pagoda was meant to confer blessings and advantages not just on particular people; everyone should be able to accumulate merit by contributing, so everyone was given the opportunity.  Therefore a big bamboo tube with knots at each end and a slot sawed into its middle was put on board the ferryboat, to let passengers contribute money as they pleased.  When the tube was full, the horseman brought it with him when he went to town to see his superiors  and carried a new one on his way back.
过渡人一看老船夫不见了，翠翠辫子上扎了白线，就明白那老的已作完了自己分上的工作，安安静静躺到土坑里去了，必一面用同情的眼色瞧着翠翠，一面就摸出钱来塞到竹筒中去。	Passengers, taking note that the ferryman was absent and that Cuicui had tied up her pigtails with white mourning ribbons, realized that the old man had completed his work in this life and was lying at peace in a mound of earth to feed the worms.  They'd look sympathetically at Cuicui as they scrounged up a few coins for the bamboo tube.
「天保佑你，死了的到西方去，活下的永保平安。」翠翠明白那些捐钱人的意思，心里酸酸的，忙把身子背过去拉船。	"May Heaven protect you. The deceased has gone to the Western Paradise. Eternal peace to the living." Grasping the compassion and sympathy in their words, but sick at heart, Cuicui was quick to turn away and tug the boat.
到了冬天，那个圮坍了的白塔，又重新修好了。	Come winter, the white pagoda that had collapsed was good as new.
可是那个在月下唱歌，使翠翠在睡梦里为歌声把灵魂轻轻浮起的年青人，还不曾回到茶峒来。	The young man who had sung under the moonlight, softly lifting up Cuicui's soul from her dreams, had not yet returned to Chadong.
这个人也许永远不回来了，也许「明天」回来！	He may never come back; or perhaps he will be back tomorrow!
